Cardiovascular ConceptsA journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.—Lao TzuCARDIOVASCULAR TEST BLUEPRINTCardiovascular 17% of total test26 questionsAcute coronary syndrome (e.g., NSTEMI, STEMI, andunstable angina)→Acute peripheral vascular insufficiency (e.g.,arterial/venous occlusion, carotid artery stenosis,endarterectomy, fem-pop bypass)  →Acute pulmonary edema→Aortic aneurysm→Aortic dissection→Aortic rupture→Cardiac surgery (e.g., CABG, valve replacement or repair)→Cardiac tamponade→Cardiac trauma →Cardiac/vascular catheterization→Cardiogenic shock→
CARDIOVASCULAR TESTABLE NURSING ACTIONSCardiomyopathies (e.g., dilated, hypertrophic, idiopathic,restrictive)  →Dysrhythmias→Heart failure→Hypertensive crisis→Myocardial conduction system abnormalities (e.g.,prolonged QT interval, Wolff-Parkinson-White)→Papillary muscle rupture→Structural heart defects (e.g., acquired and congenital,including valvular disease)→TAVR→ Apply leads for cardiac monitoring□Identify, interpret, and monitor cardiac rhythms□Recognize indications for, and manage, patients requiring:□12-lead ECGArterial catheterCardiac catheterizationCardioversionCentral venous pressure monitoringDefibrillationIABPInvasive hemodynamic monitoring*Pacing: epicardial, transcutaneous, transvenous Pericardiocentesis
*Since hemodynamic monitoring also includes respiratoryconcepts and multisystem concepts, this book places thechapter on hemodynamic concepts after the chapters onrespiratory concepts and multisystem concepts. Cardiovascular (CV) questions outnumber all of the otherclinical topics included on the Adult CCRN exam, so plan onspending the most time studying CV. The 26-question total forCV includes hemodynamic monitoring; therefore, plan tospend about 26 hours reviewing the CV and Hemodynamicschapters of this book and practicing test questions related toCV and hemodynamics. QT interval monitoring ST segment monitoringManage patients requiring:□Endovascular stenting PCI
Cardiovascular AssessmentSelect assessment concepts are included on the Adult CCRN exam. Theseconcepts may be covered in assessment questions, or they may be incorporatedin the cardiovascular disorder questions.
Normal Heart Sounds in AdultsS1S2“Lub”Caused by closure of AV (mitral, tricuspid) valvesLoudest at the apex of the heart (midclavicular, 5th intercostal space)Marks the end of diastole, the beginning of systole“Dub”Caused by closure of semilunar (aortic, pulmonic) valvesLoudest at the base of the heart (right sternal border, 2nd intercostal space)Marks the end of systole, the beginning of diastoleS2 splits on inspiration; wide, fixed splitting of S2 is caused by right bundlebranch block (RBBB)S2 is louder with a pulmonary embolismEach of the 4 valves has an auscultatory point on the chest wall. You need toknow these points (Figure 3-1).➤The base of the heart is the aortic area, where S2 (“dub”) is loudest.Anatomically, it is at the 2nd intercostal space (ICS), right sternal border.➤The apex of the heart is the mitral area, where S1 (“lub”) is loudest.Anatomically, it is at the 5th ICS, midclavicular.➤
Figure 3-1. Heart auscultatory points on thechest wall and associated valves
Abnormal Heart Sounds in AdultsS3
S4
TIPS4 is not heard in the presence of atrial fibrillation . . . why?No atrial contractionPericardial Friction RubMurmursCaused by a rapid rush of blood into a dilated ventricleOccurs early in diastole, right after S2Heard best at the apex with the bell of the stethoscopeAssociated with heart failure; may occur before crackles✰Ventricular gallop, “Kentucky”S3 is also caused by:✰Pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonaleMitral, aortic, or tricuspid insufficiencyCaused by atrial contraction of blood into a noncompliant ventricleOccurs right before S1Best heard at the apex with the bell of the stethoscopeAssociated with myocardial ischemia, infarction, hypertension, ventricularhypertrophy, and aortic stenosisAtrial gallop, “Tennessee”
Due to pericarditis, associated with pain on deep inspirationMay be positional
Valvular disease; see the Valvular Heart Disease section that follows for adetailed discussion of this topicSeptal defects (atrial or ventricular)
Blood Pressure and Pulse PressurePulse pressure:
Normal pulse pressure is 40–60 mmHg (i.e., 120/80).Systolic blood pressure is an indirect measurement of the cardiac output andstroke volume.A decrease in systolic pressure with little change or an increase in diastolicpressure is narrowing of pulse pressure; seen most often with severehypovolemia or a severe drop in cardiac output (CO), i.e., 100/78.Diastolic blood pressure is an indirect measurement of the systemic vascularresistance (SVR).A decrease in diastolic pressure that widens pulse pressure may indicatevasodilation, a drop in SVR; often seen in sepsis, septic shock (i.e.,100/38).Diastole is normally one-third longer than systole.Coronary arteries are perfused during diastole.✰
Valvular Heart DiseaseYou will most likely see several questions related to valvular heart disease and/or heartsound assessment. Since there are 4 heart valves and each valve may be diseasedwith either stenosis or insufficiency, it would be next to impossible to memorizewhether each problem is a systolic or diastolic murmur. If you can picture which valvesare open and which are closed during each phase of the cardiac cycle (systole anddiastole), you will be able to decide what problem is being described in each question.First, let’s review some heart sound basics.Normal heart sounds, S1 and S2 in adults, are due to valve closure.Valves open and close based on the pressure changes in the chamber above thevalve and below the valve. When the pressure in the chamber above a valve ishigher than that below the valve, the valve opens. When the pressure drops in thechamber above the valve and the pressure is greater below the valve, the valvecloses.Systole: ejection, high pressureDiastole: filling, low pressureWhich is longer, systole or diastole? Diastole is one-third longer than systole, needstime for filling.When are coronary arteries perfused, during systole or diastole? DiastoleWhy do the cardiac output and blood pressure drop with extreme tachyarrhythmias?No time for filling, therefore less output.
Causes of Valvular Heart DiseaseCoronary artery disease, ischemia, and acute MIDilated cardiomyopathyDegenerationBicuspid aortic valve; geneticRheumatic feverInfectionConnective tissue diseases
MurmursSYSTOLIC MURMURS (FIGURE 3-2)Lub . . . shhhb . . . Dub
DIASTOLIC MURMURS (FIGURE 3-3)Lub . . . Dub . . . shhhbMurmurs of INSUFFICIENCY (regurgitation) occur when the valve is closed.Acute or chronicMurmurs of STENOSIS occur when the valve is open.Chronic problem, develops over timeNOT acuteSemilunar valves are OPEN during systole.Aortic stenosisPulmonic stenosisAV valves are CLOSED during systole.Mitral insufficiencyWill cause large, giant V-waves on the pulmonary artery occlusion pressuretracing if the patient has a pulmonary artery catheter—Tricuspid insufficiencyVentricular septal defect (VSD), which is most common with an acute MI, may resultin a systolic murmur. It is heard at the left sternal border, 5th intercostal space (ICS).Semilunar valves are CLOSED during diastole.Aortic insufficiency (AI)Pulmonic insufficiency (PI)AV valves are OPEN during diastole.Mitral stenosis is associated with atrial fibrillation due to atrial enlargement thatoccurs over time.Tricuspid stenosis
Figure 3-2. Systole, closure of AV valves, S1 “Lub”The semilunar valves (pulmonic, aortic) are OPEN during systole.→The AV valves (tricuspid, mitral) are CLOSED during systole.→
Figure 3-3. Diastole, closure ofsemilunar valves, S2 “Dub”✰ MURMUR REVIEWThe semilunar valves (pulmonic, aortic) are CLOSED during diastole.→The AV valves (tricuspid, mitral) are OPEN during diastole.→
Note: If you can picture what the aortic valve is doing, the pulmonic valve is doingthe same (opening or closing). If you can picture what the mitral valve is doing, thetricuspid valve is doing the same (opening or closing).Does a murmur due to a VSD occur during systole or diastole?MURMURS ASSOCIATED WITH AN ACUTE MIMitral insufficiency occurs when the mitral valve is closed (murmur occurs).When is the mitral valve closed?Systole➤Mitral stenosis occurs when the mitral valve is open (murmur occurs). Whenis the mitral valve open?Diastole➤Aortic insufficiency occurs when the aortic valve is closed. When is the aorticvalve closed?Diastole➤Aortic stenosis occurs when the aortic valve is open. When is the aortic valveopen?Systole➤
During ejection or systole➤The mitral valve is attached to the left ventricular wall by the papillary musclesand the chordae tendineae. Myocardial ischemia or infarction can affect mitralvalve function and lead to acute mitral valve regurgitation.Papillary muscle dysfunction (Grade I or II), loudest at the apexPapillary muscle rupture (Grade V or VI), loudest at the apex . . . surgicalemergency!Ventricular septal defectSternal border, 5th ICS
Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS)
Ta b l e  3 -1 .  R i s k  F a c to r s  fo r  C o r o n a r y  A r te r y  D i s e a s e
Several questions on the exam always cover this topic. The questions maydescribe ECG findings and a clinical picture and then ask about what type of ACSthe patient has. Alternatively, the questions may tell you what type of ACS thepatient has (e.g., anterior MI) and expect you to know what the typical clinicalpicture would be for this type of MI. You do not need to have taken a 12-lead ECGclass to do well on these types of questions. However, you DO need to understandwhich leads are associated with which wall of the heart. If you master the followingcontent, you should do well!✰
Spectrum of Ischemic Heart DiseaseAsymptomatic coronary artery disease (CAD)Stable angina, chest pain with activity, predictable, lesions are usually fixed andcalcified 
Acute Coronary Syndrome
NOTEPatients may not have chest pain with an MI, especially women, those with diabetes, andthose older than 75. Nausea, SOB, extreme fatigue, syncope, acute delirium, or fallingmay be signs of ACS in these populations.Due to platelet-mediated thrombosisMay result in sudden cardiac deathTypes include: UNSTABLE ANGINA: Chest pain at rest, unpredictable, may be relieved withnitroglycerin, troponin negative, ST depression, or T-wave inversion on theECG1.NON-ST ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION (NSTEMI): Troponin positive, STdepression, T-wave inversion on the ECG, unrelenting chest pain2.ST ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION (STEMI): Troponin positive, STelevation in 2 or more contiguous leads, unrelenting chest pain3.
Va r i a n t o r  Pr i n zm e ta l ’s angina✰A type of unstable angina associated with transient ST segment elevationDue to coronary artery spasm with or without atherosclerotic lesionsOccurs at rest, may be cyclic (same time each day)May be precipitated by nicotine, ETOH, cocaine ingestionTroponin negativeNitroglycerin (NTG) administration results in relief of chest pain, STs return tonormal
Management of Acute Chest PainStat ECG, done and read within 10 minutes
Allows categorization to STEMI or NSTEMI/unstable anginaAllows risk stratification to high, medium, low
AspirinGive A SA P; is chewed; improves morbidity/mortalityANTICOAGULANT: heparin or enoxaparinAntiplatelet agentsClopidogrel (Plavix)Abciximab (Reopro)Eptifibatide (Integrilin)Tirofiban (Aggrastat)Beta blockerUnless ACS is due to cocaineUse cardioselective such as metoprolol (Lopressor); do not use non-cardioselective such as propranolol (Inderal).Contraindications include hypotension, bradycardia, use of phosphodiesterase-inhibitor drugs such as sildenafil (Viagra).Treat painNitroglycerinMorphineHistory, risk factor assessmentLab assessmentCardiac biomarkers, lipid profile, CBC, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine,magnesium, PT, PTTEC G  l e a d  c h a n g e s  a n d  l o c a ti o n  o f c o r o n a r y  a r te r y  d i s e a s e✰Changes in II, III, aVF → right coronary artery (RCA), inferior LV
Changes in V1, V2, V3, V4 → left anterior descending (LAD), anterior LVChanges in V5, V6, I, aVL → circumflex, lateral LVChanges in V5, V6 → low lateral LVChanges in I, aVL → high lateral LVChanges in V1, V2 → RCA, posterior LVChanges in V3R, V4R → RCA, right ventricular (RV) infarct
Differentiation of the Types of Acute MII n fe r i o r  MI✰Associated with right coronary artery (RCA) occlusionST elevation in II, III, and aVF (Figure 3-4)
Figure 3 -4 . A c u te  i n fe r i o r  w a l l  ST EMIReciprocal changes in lateral wall (I, aVL)Associated with AV conduction disturbances: 2nd-degree Type I AV block, 3rd-degree AV block, sick sinus syndrome (SSS), and sinus bradycardiaDevelopment of systolic murmur: mitral valve regurgitation (MVR) secondary topapillary muscle rupture (posterior papillary muscle has only one source of bloodsupply, the RCA).Tachycardia is associated with an inferior MI → higher mortality.                         Also associated with right ventricular (RV) infarct and posterior MIUse beta blockers and NTG with CAUTION.R i g h t v e n tr i c u l a r  (RV) i n fa r c t✰The right coronary artery, which supplies the inferior wall of the left ventricle, alsosupplies the right ventricle; therefore, about 30% of inferior wall MI patients alsohave a right ventricular (RV) infarct.Size of the infarct will determine symptoms.A right-sided ECG (Figure 3-5) may demonstrate the ST changes.
Figure 3 -5 .  L e a d  p l a c e m e n t fo r  r i g h t-s i d e d  EC Gto  a s s e s s  fo r  RV i n fa r c tSigns/symptomsJVD at 45°, high CVP, hypotension, usually clear lungs, bradyarrhythmias— ECG with ST elevation in V4R (Figure 3-6)—
Figure 3 -6 . R i g h t-s i d e d  EC G  r e s u l ts  w i th  e v i d e n c e  o f RV i n fa r c tTreatmentFluids—Positive inotropes—AvoidPreload reducers → nitrates, diuretics—Caution with beta blockers, often cannot give initially due to hypotension—A n te r i o r  MI✰Associated with left anterior descending (LAD) occlusionST elevation in V1–V4: precordial leads, V leads (Figure 3-7)
Figure 3 -7 .  A n te r i o r  ST EMIReciprocal changes (ST depression) in inferior wall (II, III, aVF)May develop 2nd-degree Type II AV block or RBBB (the LAD supplies thecommon bundle of His) → ominous signDevelopment of systolic murmur: possible ventricular septal defectHigher mortality than an inferior MI: H EA R T  FAILURE
L a te r a l MIST elevation in V5, V6 (low lateral)ST elevation in I, aVL (high lateral)Generally involves left circumflex artery
Treatment of STEMI
PATIENT CARE FOLLOWING REPERFUSION FOR STEMIPC I  (9 0  m i n u te s ,  d o o r -to -b a l l o o n  i n fl a ti o n i n  c o r o n a r y  a r te r y  a t p o i n t o f l e s i o n )
F i b r i n o l y ti c  T h e r a p y  (3 0  m i n u te s  d o o r -to -d r u g  a d m i n i s tr a ti o n )Determine onset of infarct, if symptoms < 12 hours → R EPER F U SI O NPercutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)—standard is door-to-balloon within90 minutesFibrinolytic drug therapy—standard is door-to-drug within 30 minutesEligibility criteriaST elevation in 2 or more contiguous leads or new onset left bundle branchblock (LBBB)Onset of chest pain < 12 hoursChest pain of 30 minutes in durationChest pain unresponsive to sublingual (SL) nitroglycerin (NTG)Monitor for signs of reocclusion: chest pain, ST elevation → contact physician.Monitor for vasovagal reaction during sheath removal → give fluids, atropine.Hypotension < 90 systolic with or without bradycardia, absence ofcompensatory tachycardiaAssociated symptoms of pallor, nausea, yawning, diaphoresisMonitor for bleeding: sheath site.Immediately apply manual pressure 2 fingerbreadths above the puncture site.Continue manual pressure for a minimum of 20 min (30 min if still on GP IIb/IIIainhibitors) to achieve hemostasis.Monitor for bleeding: retroperitoneal → fluids, blood products.Sudden hypotensionSevere low back painMonitor for vascular complications → pulse assessments.Absolute contraindicationsAny prior intracranial hemorrhageKnown structural cerebral vascular lesion (e.g., arteriovenous malformation)
Known malignant intracranial neoplasm (primary or metastatic)Ischemic stroke within 3 months EXCEPT acute ischemic stroke within 3 hoursSuspected aortic dissectionActive bleeding or bleeding diathesis (excluding menses)Significant closed-head or facial trauma within 3 monthsEv i d e n c e  o f r e p e r fu s i o n✰Chest pain relief: due to fibrinolysis of clotResolution of ST segment deviations: due to return of blood flowMarked elevation of troponin/CK-MB: due to myocardial “stunning” when vesselopensReperfusion arrhythmias (VT, VF, accelerated idioventricular rhythm [AIVR]): dueto myocardial “stunning” when vessel opensNursing managementAssess for major and minor bleeding.Major bleed, change in LOC, brain bleed—Institute bleeding precautions.Assess for reperfusion (see above).Assess for reocclusion as evidenced by recurring chest pain, ST deviation.
Treatment of NSTEMINo emergent reperfusionSame meds as STEMIIf high risk score or continued chest pain, signs of instability, start GP IIb/IIIainhibitors (Integrilin, Reopro) and prepare for diagnostic cardiac catheterizationwithin 24 hours.
Complications of an Acute MIARRHYTHMIAS—MOST COMMON!Ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillationDefibrillate VFDrug therapy for stable, sustained VT and to prevent recurrent VFSynchronized cardioversion for unstable, sustained VTBradycardia, heart blocks, sick sinus syndrome (SSS)Atrial fibrillationIncreases risk of mortality 10–15%, even when returned to NSRHeart failureCardiogenic shockReinfarctionThromboembolic eventsPericarditisVentricular aneurysmVentricular septal defectPapillary muscle ruptureCardiac wall rupture
Interventional CardiologyCardiac Catheterization Lab Procedures
Goal of PCI with StentComplications of PCIDiagnostic cardiac catheterizationPercutaneous Coronary Interventions (PCI)Intracoronary stenting: most common PCI procedureBalloon angioplasty without stent (PTCA): seldom used, highreocclusion ratesPercutaneous balloon valvotomyPacemaker implantationElectrophysiology (EP) studies Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)Cardiac ablation therapyRestoration of blood flow distal to a coronary artery lesion withpartial or total occlusionIn-hospital death is rare, ~ 1.8%.In-hospital MI ~ 0.4%Coronary artery perforationDistal coronary artery embolizationIntramural hematomaFailure of stent deployment
Patient Care During Sheath RemovalStent thrombosis is most likely to be on the exam.✰Most incidents occur acutely (within 24 hours of stentplacement) or subacutely (within the first 30 days).Stroke or TIA: greater risk if with aortic stenosisArrhythmiasRenal failureRetroperitoneal bleed is most likely to be on the exam.✰Record baseline peripheral pulses and vitals.Provide comfort (i.e., morphine 2–4 mg IV) before removal.Monitor BP q 5–10 min during sheath removal.Monitor for vasovagal response (hypotension < 90 systolic withor without bradycardia, absence of compensatory tachycardiaand associated symptoms of pallor, nausea, yawning,diaphoresis).Vasovagal managementHold nitratesAtropine 0.5 mg IV (even in absence of bradycardia if othersigns occur)IV bolus of 250 mL 0.9 NS if patient is not immediatelyresponsive to atropineAssess for anxiety/pain as contributing factors.Achieve hemostasis.Manual pressure for 20 to 30 minutesMechanical clamp compression using FemoStop or C-clampClosure device
Manage Complications of Cardiac CatheterizationProceduresMonitor for signs of coronary artery reocclusion (if PCI): chestpain, ST elevation → contact physician.Monitor for vasovagal reaction during sheath removal → givefluids, atropine.Monitor for bleeding: sheath site.Immediately apply manual pressure 2 fingerbreadths above thepuncture site.Continue manual pressure for a minimum of 20 min (30 min ifstill on GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors) to achieve hemostasis.Monitor for bleeding: retroperitoneal → fluids, blood products.Sudden hypotensionSevere low back painMonitor for vascular complications: pulse assessments.Monitor for hematoma at sheath insertion site: assess sheathinsertion site for swelling.
Hypertensive Crisis/EmergencyOne question may focus on this topic. The question will usually berelated to how the topic differs from hypertensive urgency or whatdrugs are used for treatment.Hypertensive emergency or CRISIS is elevated BP withevidence of end organ damage (brain, heart, kidney, retina) thatcan be related to acute hypertension → needs critical careadmission.Hypertensive urgency is elevated BP without evidence of acuteend organ damage → usually no need for critical care admission.Treatment of hypertensive crisis or emergency → emergentlowering of BP needed.Nitroprusside (Nipride)Preload and afterload reducer—Assess for cyanide toxicity secondary to drug metabolite(Thiocyanate): mental status change (restlessness,lethargy), tachycardia, seizure, a need for ↑ in dose,unexplained metabolic acidosis, especially in those withrenal impairment or when a drug is used > 24 hrs.—Labetalol (Normodyne, Trandate)Intermittent IV doses preferred to a continuous infusion, dueto the possibility of continuing the drug beyond the maximumdose of 300 mg.—Duration of effect persists 4–6 hrs after IV dose isdiscontinued.—
Greatest risk is STROKE.
Acute Peripheral VascularInsufficiencyOne question about this topic may appear on the exam. Thatquestion generally covers acute issues that are related to peripheralarterial disease (PAD) or acute symptomatic carotid artery disease.
Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD)Signs and symptoms (the 6 “Ps”)Pain (activity, rest)PallorPulse absent or diminishedParesthesiaParalysisPoikilothermia: loss of hair on toes or lower legs; glossy, thin,cool, dry skin (chronic sign of PAD)Additionally, cool to touch, minimal edemaAnkle-Brachial Index (ABI)Test to assess for PADUsed to assess the adequacy of lower extremity perfusionNormal is > 0.90Divide the ankle pressure by the brachial pressure on thesame side—You only need to remember what a normal ABI is for theexam.Additional diagnostic testingDoppler ultrasound ArteriographyPatient care management for PADEmbolectomy, bypass graft, angioplastyBed in reverse Trendelenburg✰Do NOT elevate the affected extremity—will decrease perfusion✰MedicationsThrombolytics (tPA)
Anticoagulants (heparin)Antiplatelet agents (ASA, clopidogrel)Vasodilators
Acute Symptomatic Carotid Artery DiseaseSigns and symptoms Transient ischemic attack (TIA)Monocular visual disturbancesAphasiaStrokeDiagnostic testing may include one of the following:Angiography (gold standard): risk of stroke during examCarotid duplex ultrasoundComputed tomography angiography (CTA)Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)TreatmentCarotid endarterectomy (CEA)Carotid stenting Aspirin Statin therapyPost-procedure monitoringFrequent neurological and motor checks Close blood pressure and heart rate monitoring: patient mayexperience labile BP and/or bradyarrhythmia with hypertension,hypotension, or bradycardia.Monitor for bleeding. Patient may develop hypoperfusion syndrome with the signsand symptoms of a headache ipsilateral to the revascularizedcarotid artery, focal motor seizures, and/or an intracerebralhemorrhage. 
Arrhythmia Interpretation, ArrhythmiaEmergencies, and Pacemaker TherapyTest candidates are expected to have mastered arrhythmiainterpretation and have an understanding of ACLS principles, so lookthese over. An exam question may describe the arrhythmia orprovide an arrhythmia strip for interpretation, but the question willusually be related to patient management.F o r  e x a m  q u e s ti o n s  th a t i n c l u d e  th e  d e v e l o p m e n t o f a na r r h y th m i a ,  p a y  c l o s e  a tte n ti o n  to  th e  p a ti e n t’s clinicalr e s p o n s e  to  th e  a r r h y th m i a .  I s  th e  p a ti e n t s ta b l e  o ru n s ta b l e ?  I f th e  c l i n i c a l  d e s c r i p ti o n  i s  N O T  p r o v i d e d ,c o n s i d e r  th i s  fa c t a n d  d o  N O T  a s s u m e  th e  p a ti e n tresponse!✰
Conduction AbnormalitiesWo l ff-Pa r k i n s o n -W h i te  (W PW ) syndrome is a geneticconduction abnormality in which an abnormal conductionpathway exists that allows a reentrant tachycardia pathway tobypass the normal AV node conduction pathway, resulting insupraventricular tachycardia. WPW is primarily seen in thoseyounger than 30-years-old. When in sinus rhythm, the ECG demonstrates a short PRinterval and the presence of a delta wave (seen as a slow riseof the initial upstroke of the QRS).WPW results in a supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) when theabnormal pathway takes over, but it may also present as pre-e x c i te d  a tr i a l  fi b r i l l a ti o n (irregular rhythm, rates of 150beats/minute or greater, and a wide QRS).The signs and symptoms during the SVT include palpitations,dizziness, chest pain, shortness of breath, and syncope.Treatment of WPWRadiofrequency ablation to eliminate the reentrant pathway —If unstable SVT is present, perform synchronizedcardioversion or administer adenosine.—If pre-excited atrial fibrillation (AF) is present, administerbeta blockers, amiodarone, or procainamide IV.—Do NOT give adenosine, digoxin, or calcium channelblockers for pre-excited AF; these agents may enhanceantegrade conduction through the abnormal pathway by
increasing the refractory period in the AV node, r e s u l ti n gin v e n tr i c u l a r  fi b r i l l a ti o n. Pr o l o n g a ti o n  o f th e  Q T  i n te r v a l (causes, treatment) is oftenaddressed on the Adult CCRN exam. QT prolongation may lead totorsades de pointes. Causes of QT prolongation include:✰Drugs—amiodarone, quinidine, haloperidol, procainamideElectrolyte problems—hypokalemia, hypocalcemia,hypomagnesemiaTreatment for torsades VT—magnesium
Pacemaker TherapyFor pacemaker therapy, which includes some knowledge ofimplantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) devices, review thefollowing information.Pacemaker Code
On the Adult CCRN exam, you may see a question that asks howa “VVI” or a “DDD” pacemaker works. If you remember the code,you should be able to figure out the answer.Sample questions:First initial = chamber paced; this was “invented” firstSecond initial = chamber sensed; this function came alongsecondThird initial = response to sensing; last to be developedI = inhibits (pacer detects intrinsic cardiac activity andwithholds its pacing stimuli) . . . demandD = inhibits and triggers (pacer detects intrinsic cardiac activityand fires a pacing stimulus in response)O = none
Which pacemaker paces both the atria and the ventricles,senses both the atria and the ventricles, and can inhibit anda.
Answers:      a. DDD      b. VVIReview the 3 basic pacer malfunctions:Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator (ICD)ICDs can provide “tiered” therapy:
If the ICD does not correct the sudden death arrhythmia, shock asusual; do not place shocking pads directly over the ICD.trigger in response to sensing?Which pacemaker paces the ventricle, senses the ventricle,and inhibits pacing in response to sensing?b.
Failure to pace (no spike at all when expected)1.Failure to capture (spikes without a QRS for ventricular pacing)2.Failure to sense (pacing in native beats)3.Programmed to shock (defibrillate or synchronizedcardioversion)Programmed to burst pace (sense tachyarrhythmia, provide aseries of beats faster than the tachyarrhythmia, and thensuddenly stop [with the hope of the recovery of the SA node])Programmed to provide pacing for bradyarrhythmiasThe patient will require special education related to the deviceand emotional support, since many patients experience a FEAR
of being shocked.
Heart FailureHeart failure (HF) is a broad topic. For the exam, if you focus on the following,you will be ready!Heart failure may be acute, chronic, acute exacerbation of chronic HF, systolic ordiastolic HF, or right-sided or left-sided HF. The most extreme HF occurs when allcompensatory mechanisms have failed, and the result is cardiogenic shock. Anunderstanding of these concepts and the management of each, as well as anunderstanding of heart failure classifications, is needed in order to successfullyanswer the Adult CCRN exam questions on this topic.
TIPWhen studying, compare and contrast systolic and diastolic heart failure anddifferentiate the clinical signs of left-sided and right-sided heart failure.Heart failure is a clinical syndrome that is characterized by signs andsymptoms associated with high intracardiac pressures and decreased cardiacoutput.Acute decompensated heart failure is the abrupt onset of symptoms thatare severe enough to merit hospitalization.~ 75% of patients with acute decompensated HF have a history of chronicheart failure.Heart failure with systolic dysfunction (left ventricular systolic dysfunction—LVSD): ejection fraction (EF) is 40% or less, problem with ejectionHeart failure with diastolic dysfunction: EF is > 50%, problem with filling,ejection is OK
What Is BNP?B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is released by the ventricle when the ventricleis under wall stress in attempts to dilate and decrease ventricular pressure.BNP elevates when the left ventricle is under stress (left ventricular failure) or,to a lesser degree, BNP elevates when the right ventricle is under stress(pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary embolism).
Pathophysiology of Acute Decompensated SystolicDysfunction
In the figure above: CAD = coronary artery disease; LV = left ventricle;EF = ejection fraction; LVEDP = left ventricular end-diastolic pressureWhen systolic dysfunction is prolonged and becomes chronic, compensatoryhormones lead to ventricular remodeling over time.Drugs are used to decrease neurohormonal effects.

Pathophysiology of HF with Diastolic Dysfunction
✰ Table 3-2. Summary of the Differences Between Systolic and DiastolicHeart Failure

✰ Chest X-Ray Findings: Systolic vs. Diastolic HF
Figure 3-8. Normal and enlarged heart sizeHeart failure may also be categorized according to which ventricle is failing, theright or the left (Tables 3-3 and 3-4). The etiologies and treatment are different.The Adult CCRN exam may present a case scenario with backgroundinformation, signs and symptoms, and a description of whether the HF is right-sided or left-sided. Then, you will be asked to identify the correct treatment.Systolic HF may be evidenced by a large, dilated heart or by a normal heartsize on the chest film.An enlarged heart is often associated with a shift of the point of maximalimpulse (PMI) from midclavicular to the left (Figure 3-8).Diastolic HF generally is evidenced by a normal heart size on the chest film.However, on the 12-lead ECG, there may be a left ventricular hypertrophypattern, especially when the patient has a history of uncontrolledhypertension.
Table 3-3. Causes of Right-Sided and Left-Sided Heart Failure
Table 3-4. Signs and Symptoms of Right-Sided and Left-Sided Heart Failure

Heart Failure ClassificationsThe Adult CCRN exam may include a question related to heart failureclassifications. There are two types of classifications: the American HeartAssociation (AHA) stages of heart failure (which are classified according to heartfailure progression and recommended therapy for each stage) and the New YorkHeart Association (NYHA) four functional classes (which are based on thepatient’s symptoms and do not include suggested treatment).American Heart Association (AHA) Stages of Heart FailureNYHA Heart Failure ClassesThe main cause of death from heart failure is the development of suddendeath arrhythmia. Select patients with NYHA Class II to IV may be candidatesfor an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD).Stage A—High risk; no evidence of dysfunction Stage B—Heart disorder or structural defect; no symptoms Stage C—Heart disorder or structural defect, with symptoms (past or present)Stage D—End-stage cardiac disease, with symptoms despite maximal therapy(inotropic or mechanical support)Class I—Ordinary activity does not cause symptoms,although EXTRAORDINARY ACTIVITY results in heart failure symptoms.Class II—Comfortable at rest, but ORDINARY ACTIVITY results in heartfailure symptoms.Class III—Comfortable at rest, but MINIMAL ACTIVITY causes heart failuresymptoms.Class IV—Symptoms of heart failure occur AT REST; there is a severelimitation of physical activity.
CardiomyopathyIf the Adult CCRN exam includes a question on cardiomyopathy, it willmost likely be on either dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy(Table 3-5).Table 3-5. Differences Between Dilated and HypertrophicCardiomyopathy

Cardiogenic ShockWhen compensatory mechanisms fail to maintain the cardiac output, the mostextreme end on the continuum of heart failure occurs—cardiogenic shock (Table3-6). Cardiogenic shock has several causes. Most commonly, it is due to anextreme drop in stroke volume secondary to systolic dysfunction, which results in:
Table 3-6. Clinical Presentation of Cardiogenic Shock
Elevated left ventricular preload (PAOP) with associated pulmonary symptomsElevated left ventricular afterload (SVR) due to vasoconstrictive compensatorymechanismsA resultant drop in cardiac output to the point where perfusion to organs is nolonger adequate
Etiologies of Cardiogenic ShockAcute MIChronic heart failureCardiomyopathyDysrhythmiasCardiac tamponadePapillary muscle ruptureObliterates the mitral valveLife-threatening emergencyRequires immediate surgical intervention
Treatment of Cardiogenic Shock
Table 3-7. Treatment of Cardiogenic Shock
Identify the causeManage arrhythmias (brady, tachy) that may be contributing to a decrease incardiac outputReperfusion if there is STEMI (percutaneous coronary intervention orfibrinolytic therapy)Emergent surgery if cardiogenic shock is due to a mechanical problem—ruptured papillary muscle, VSDMechanical supportSee Table 3-7
Mechanical Circulatory Support
Benefits of INFLATIONThere are several types of mechanical circulatory support devices available,but intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) therapy is specifically listed on the testblueprint. You will not be tested on the details of this therapy. However, youneed to know that it is used in the management of left ventricular heart failure,cardiogenic shock, and cardiomyopathies, and it is also used for patients whoare awaiting a heart transplant.Benefits of IABP Therapy✰You will likely have at least 1 question on this.Just remember, the balloon does 2 things: it INFLATES and it DEFLATES(Figure 3-9 and Figure 3-10).
Figure 3-9. Balloon inflation—increasescoronary artery perfusionBenefits of DEFLATION Inflates at dicrotic notch of the arterial waveform, beginning of diastole→
Figure 3-10. Balloon deflation—decreasesafterload Deflates right before systole begins; determined by a set TRIGGER fordeflation, R-wave of ECG or upstroke of the arterial pressure wave→
Cardiac SurgeryNOTEThe exam questions related to heart surgery generally focus oncomplications and nursing care postoperatively.
Cardiopulmonary BypassAortic cross-clamping is done, and the heart is stopped duringsurgery.Most common cannulation sites:AortaRight atriumThe longer the bypass time, the more bleeding there is and themore complications there may be postoperatively.
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) ProcedurePriming with isotonic crystalloids (hemodilution); enhancesoxygenation by improving blood flowHypothermia (28°C–36°C) is induced.Anticoagulation with large heparin dosesRapid circulatory arrest is achieved during diastole with theinfusion of a potassium cardioplegic agent; the cardioplegic agentis reinfused at regular intervals; note that either a warm or a coldcardioplegic agent may be used.
Post-Op Assessment for Complications Relatedto CABGHemodynamic abnormalitiesArrhythmiasTamponade✰Pericarditis✰Electrolyte abnormalitiesHematologic abnormalities, bleedingPulmonary problems (pneumonia, atelectasis, difficultyweaning from mechanical ventilation)Pain, anxietyRenal failureEndocrine problems (issues with glycemic control)Gastrointestinal problems (nausea, vomiting, ileus)InfectionsPost-op chest tube management✰Maintain patency.Do not allow dependent loops.Milking or stripping chest tubes is not routinely indicated.If clots appear, gently milk the chest tubes.—Mediastinal chest tubes remove serosanguinous fluid from theoperative site, whereas pleural chest tubes remove air, blood, orserous fluid from the pleural space.Keep chest tubes lower than patient’s chest.Do not clamp the system unless you are changing the drainagesystem or there is a system disconnect. When the tube is
clamped, the connection to the negative chamber is lost.A chest tube output > 100 mL for 2 consecutive hours generallyrequires intervention.Maintain hemodynamic stability.Correct the volume status.Administer blood products.
Valve SurgeryTable 3-8. Advantages and Disadvantages of Mechanical andBiological Valves

Nursing Considerations Post-Valve Repair orReplacementAvoid a drop in preload. Most patients who have had valvularstenosis or chronic regurgitation have had elevated end-diastolicvolumes. Sudden preload normalization may result inhypotension.Anticoagulation will be needed for mechanical valve replacement;biological valve replacement will require antiplatelet therapy(aspirin). Anticipate conduction disturbances since the mitral, tricuspid,and aortic valves are anatomically close to conduction pathways.Temporary or permanent pacing may be needed.
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement (TAVR)TAVR, which was approved in 2011, is a procedure that involvesplacement of a collapsible prosthetic valve (either bovine orporcine) over the diseased valve (either a native valve or apreviously placed artificial valve). Access to the aorta is usually achieved percutaneously or througha small incision, avoiding cross-clamping of the aorta andcardiopulmonary bypass.Most TAVR procedures are done via the femoral artery and areperformed in a cardiac catheterization laboratory that is modifiedto accommodate TAVR procedures.Ideal candidates for TAVR are those with severe aortic valvedisease that is classified as high-risk for open surgery. Those who are at an intermediate risk for open surgery mayqualify for either TAVR or open surgical replacement, dependingupon a decision from the interdisciplinary heart valve teambased on an evaluation of the patient.Patients who are considered extreme high-risk/inoperable orlow-risk for open procedure are NOT candidates for TAVR.Note: There are studies looking at TAVR for a patient who isclassified as low-risk for an open procedure for aortic valvereplacement, but as of the date of this publication, a low-riskpatient is not considered an ideal candidate for this procedure.Complications: vascular complications associated with femoralaccess (similar to post-PCI, including hematomas, retroperitonealbleeding, and arterial occlusion); heart block; stroke; acute kidney
injury; and paravalvular regurgitation (associated with a mismatchof the prosthetic valve and the native valve annulus)Dual antiplatelet therapy will be required, including aspirin (75–100 mg/day) for life and clopidogrel (75 mg/day) for 3 to 6 monthspost-procedure.
Cardiac TamponadeEtiologies: surgical-related cause (post-op cardiac surgery), medical-relatedcause (pericarditis, pericardial effusion), traumaSigns and symptomsRestlessness and agitationHypotension↑ JVDEqualization of CVP, pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, and PAOPMuffled heart soundsEnlarging cardiac silhouette and mediastinum on a chest radiographNarrowed pulse pressure (i.e., 82/68)✰Pulsus paradoxus: an excessive drop (greater than 12 mmHg) in the SBPduring inspiration, which is the result of cardiac muscle restriction caused bythe tamponade with inspiration; the intrathoracic pressure increases, and thevenous return decreases ✰Best seen on an arterial waveform as respiratory variation (Figure 3-11).—
Figure 3-11. Pulsus paradoxus as seen on anarterial waveform
Cardiac TraumaWhich valve is most at risk for a rupture due to trauma?Table 3-9. Pericarditis vs. Myocardial ContusionAortic valve because it is most anterior in the chest A myocardial contusion has signs and symptoms that are similarto that for pericarditis, but there are important differences betweenthese two conditions, as outlined in Table 3-9.

AneurysmsAn aneurysm is a localized, blood-filled outpouching in the wall of an artery. Thelarger it becomes, the more likely it is to rupture. The Adult CCRN exam maycontain a question about abdominal aortic or thoracic aortic aneurysms.
Etiology of AneurysmsArteriosclerosisHypertensionSmokingObesityBacterial infectionsCongenital anomaliesTraumaMarfan syndrome
Figure 3-12. Types and locations ofcardiovascular-related aneurysms
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms (75% of all CV-relatedaneurysms)Asymptomatic if smallPulsations in abdominal areaAbdominal or low back painNausea, vomitingShock
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms (25% of all CV-relatedaneurysms)Sudden tearing, ripping pain in chest that radiates to the shoulders, neck, andbackCoughHoarsenessDysphagiaDyspneaDizziness, difficulty walking and speakingWidening of mediastinum on a chest X-ray
Treatment of AneurysmsAneurysms that are < 5 cm in diameter and produce no symptomsMonitor regularly.Ultrasound or CT scan—Treat hypertension: drug class of choice is beta blockers, which may slowgrowth.People with Marfan syndrome are often treated sooner.Thoracic aortic aneurysm that is causing symptoms or is > 6 cmSurgical repairDissection: SURGERYAggressive treatment of hypertension and heart rate controlLabetalol drip—
Aortic DissectionBlood passes through the inner lining and between the layers of the aorta.
Now that you have reviewed the key cardiovascular concepts, go to thePractice Questions. Answer the questions, and then check your answers.Continue to review the information until you answer 80% of the practicequestions correctly.The tear is spiral in nature.A dissection can occur suddenly or gradually.A dissection occurs in the ascending aorta or in the aortic arch.A dissection is life-threatening.A dissection requires immediate surgical intervention.
Practice Questions1. A 59-year-old male is admitted with complaints of chest pain anddyspnea. ST elevation and T-wave inversion were seen on the ECGin V2, V3, and V4. IV thrombolytic therapy was started in theEmergency Department. Indications of successful reperfusion wouldinclude all of the following EXCEPT:(A) pain cessation.(B) a decrease in CK or troponin.(C) reversal of ST segment elevation with a return to baseline.(D) short runs of ventricular tachycardia.2. Which of the following medication orders should the nurse questionfor the patient described in question 1?(A) metoprolol (Lopressor)(B) aspirin(C) propranolol (Inderal)(D) heparin3. If heart block develops while caring for the patient described inquestion 1, which of the following types would it most likely be?(A) sinoatrial block(B) second-degree, Type I(C) second-degree, Type II(D) third-degree, complete4. Appropriate drug therapy for dilated cardiomyopathy is aimed toward:
(A) decreasing contractility and decreasing both preload andafterload.(B) decreasing contractility and increasing both preload andafterload.(C) increasing contractility and increasing both preload andafterload.(D) increasing contractility and decreasing both preload andafterload.5. An 18-year-old is admitted with a history of a syncopal episode at themall, and he has a history of an eating disorder. The nurse notes aprolonged QT on the 12-lead ECG and anticipates that a reduction inan electrolyte is the cause. Which of the following is least likely tocause this patient’s problem?(A) sodium(B) magnesium(C) potassium(D) calcium6. On the third day after admission for an acute MI, a 67-year-old malecomplains of chest pain and develops a fever. The pain is worse withdeep inspiration and is relieved when he leans forward. There arenonspecific ST changes in the precordial leads of the ECG. Thenurse anticipates that this patient will most likely need treatment for:(A) a thoracic aneurysm.(B) Dressler’s syndrome.(C) reinfarction.(D) pleuritis.
7. A patient is admitted to the CCU after PCI with a stent. A femoralsheath is in place, and the site is dry with no hematoma. Hesuddenly complains of severe back pain. His neck veins are flat, thehead of the bed is at 30 degrees, and his heart sounds are normal.His vital signs are as follows: BP is 78/48, heart rate is 124beats/minute, and respiratory rate is 26 breaths/minute. What shouldthe nurse suspect?(A) cardiac tamponade(B) retroperitoneal bleeding(C) coronary artery dissection(D) acute closure of the stented coronary artery8. A patient admitted with an NSTEMI develops acute shortness ofbreath, a recurrence of chest pain, and a loud systolic murmur at theapex of the heart. Which of the following has most likely occurred?(A) The patient has developed acute mitral valve regurgitation.(B) The patient has developed acute reinfarction.(C) The patient has developed acute mitral valve stenosis.(D) The patient has developed an acute ventricular septal defect.9. A patient has just returned from the OR after insertion of a VVIpacemaker. In order to assess the functioning of this pacemakeraccurately, the nurse needs to understand that:
(A) both the atrium and ventricle are paced and sensed and mayeither inhibit or pace in response to sensing.(B) the ventricle is paced, ventricular activity is sensed, and pacingis inhibited in response to ventricular sensing.(C) both the atrium and ventricle are paced, but only ventricularpacing can be inhibited by a sensed intrinsic ventricular impulse.(D) the ventricle is paced, in response to a sensed intrinsic atrialimpulse or inhibited by a sensed intrinsic ventricular impulse.10. A patient complains of sudden dyspnea 5 days S/P an acute MI (STelevation in II, III, and aVF, with ST depression in I and aVL). Thepatient is anxious, diaphoretic, and hypotensive. An examinationreveals the development of a loud holosystolic murmur at the apexthat radiates to the axilla. The patient has crackles throughout but noS3 heart sound at the apex. What is the most likely cause of thispatient’s deterioration?(A) right ventricular failure related to a right ventricular MI(B) ventricular septal defect(C) left ventricular failure due to extension of the MI(D) acute mitral regurgitation due to papillary muscle rupture ordysfunction11. A patient with a diagnosis of cardiogenic shock now requires highdose dopamine (greater than 10 mcg/kg/min) to maintain her bloodpressure, and the cardiologist is planning to start IABP therapy. Thistherapy will benefit the patient because it will:
(A) increase afterload with balloon inflation and decrease diastolicaugmentation with balloon deflation.(B) decrease afterload with balloon deflation and increase diastolicaugmentation with balloon inflation.(C) decrease afterload with balloon inflation and decrease diastolicaugmentation with balloon deflation.(D) increase afterload with balloon deflation and decrease diastolicaugmentation with balloon inflation.12. Four days after mitral valve replacement, a patient goes into atrialfibrillation with a rapid ventricular response. What should be thenurse’s initial action?(A) Order a 12-lead ECG.(B) Evaluate the patient for clinical signs of hypoperfusion.(C) Notify the physician.(D) Ask the patient to bear down as if having a bowel movement.13. A patient’s 12-lead ECG shows sinus bradycardia at 44 beats/minuteand ST segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF. Which of thefollowing treatments for bradycardia would best resolve the problemfor this patient?(A) temporary transvenous pacing(B) transcutaneous pacing(C) percutaneous coronary intervention(D) administration of atropine14. Which drug would most likely be given to a patient with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy?
(A) metoprolol(B) digoxin(C) dopamine(D) dobutamine15. A patient is admitted with ST elevation in V2, V3, and V4. Four daysafter admission, the patient suddenly developed a holosystolicmurmur at the lower left sternal border, chest pain, and hypotension.What complication should the nurse expect?(A) papillary muscle rupture(B) ventricular septal defect(C) acute mitral valve stenosis(D) acute reinfarction16. A postoperative patient on the surgical unit suddenly develops chestpain, extreme weakness, and dyspnea and is found to have STelevation in II, III, and aVF on the stat ECG. Her BP is 92/62, herheart rate is 58 beats/minute, her respiratory rate is28 breaths/minute, her lungs are clear, and a heart soundassessment reveals an S4 with no murmurs. In addition to preparingthe patient for PCI, which of the following interventions would thenurse anticipate?(A) a nitroglycerin drip and the administration of aspirin(B) the administration of furosemide (Lasix) and atropine(C) transcutaneous pacing and the administration of morphine(D) aggressive fluid administration and a right-sided ECG17. A 52-year-old male presents with complaints of blurred vision andshortness of breath. His BP is 232/136, his heart rate is 102beats/minute, his respiratory rate is 28 breaths/minute, he has
crackles in the lower lung fields bilaterally, and there are S3 and S4heart sounds upon auscultation. Which of the following would beindicated for this patient?(A) a nitroprusside drip and admission to the critical care unit(B) the administration of digoxin and furosemide(C) a labetalol drip and admission to a medical unit(D) the administration of lisinopril and a calcium channel blocker18. An 80-year-old female presents with a chief complaint of acuteshortness of breath. A clinical exam reveals that her BP is 180/102,her heart rate is 105 beats/minute, her respiratory rate is 32breaths/minute, she has lung crackles bilaterally, her pulse oximetryis 88%, and there are S4 heart sounds upon auscultation. An ECGrevealed sinus tachycardia and a left ventricular hypertrophy pattern;a chest radiograph showed a normal heart size and pulmonaryvascular congestion; and an echocardiogram showed an EF of55%. Which of the following should be avoided in this patient’streatment plan?(A) a calcium channel blocker(B) digoxin(C) low dose diuretics(D) oxygen19. A patient had a left internal carotid artery stent placed, and the latestassessment reveals that the patient is alert and oriented, has aweakened right hand grasp and a right facial droop, has stable vitalsigns, and has a dry procedure site without bleeding. The RN shouldcontact the physician because this patient is most likely experiencingwhich of the following?
(A) a right cerebral hemorrhage(B) hyperperfusion syndrome (C) acute cerebrovascular insufficiency (D) hypovolemia 20. Mrs. Jones has an exacerbation of her heart failure, with signs andsymptoms of jugular venous distention (JVD), peripheral edema, andabdominal discomfort. These are clinical signs specific to:(A) acute left ventricular failure.(B) chronic right ventricular failure.(C) acute right ventricular failure.(D) chronic dehydration.21. A nurse who is managing a post-op CABG patient assesses asudden drop in BP, distended neck veins, muffled heart sounds,minimal chest tube output, and a systolic pressure that fluctuateswith the breathing pattern. This patient most likely needs:(A) an emergent return to the OR.(B) clamping of the chest tube.(C) a transfusion of PRBCs.(D) high dose dopamine.22. Physical assessment findings that are indicative of a significant rightventricular (RV) infarction would include:(A) bibasilar crackles.(B) flat neck veins with the patient in Semi-Fowler’s position.(C) jugular venous distention.(D) tachypnea and frothy sputum.
23. What pulse change might a nurse expect in the presence of cardiactamponade?(A) pulsus alternans(B) pulsus paradoxus(C) pulsus magnus(D) pulsus bisferiens24. A patient with mitral regurgitation develops atrial fibrillation with aheart rate of 88 beats/minute and a BP of 118/75. Which of thefollowing may be indicated?(A) beta blockers and vasopressors(B) cardiac glycosides and calcium channel blockers(C) beta blockers and calcium channel blockers(D) antiarrhythmics and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors25. Which of the following are predominant signs of left ventricularsystolic dysfunction?(A) pedal edema, ascites, hepatomegaly, weight gain, ejectionfraction less than 40%(B) S4 heart sound, bibasilar crackles, hypertension, ejectionfraction greater than 40%(C) S3 heart sound, new cough, bibasilar crackles, ejection fractionless than 40%(D) hypertension, murmur, chest pain, weight gain, ejection fractiongreater than 40%26. A nurse was preparing a patient with the diagnosis of STEMI for apercutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The monitor hadpreviously shown a normal sinus rhythm (NSR); the BP had been
128/78; and chest pain had improved from a “9” to a “2” on a 0–10scale. The monitor alarm then sounded, and the rhythm below wasobserved by the nurse:
Based on this information, which of the following statements isTRUE?(A) This change is most commonly seen with an acute inferior MI.Assess the patient. If serious signs and symptoms develop,begin transcutaneous pacing (TCP).(B) This change is most commonly seen with an acute anterior MI.Assess the patient. If serious signs and symptoms develop, giveatropine.(C) This change is most commonly seen with an acute inferior MI.Assess the patient. If serious signs and symptoms develop,begin dobutamine.(D) This change is most commonly seen with an anterior MI. Assessthe patient. If serious signs and symptoms develop, begintranscutaneous pacing (TCP).27. A 58-year-old patient developed chest pain that he scored as an “8.”A rapid assessment included profuse diaphoresis, a BP of  78/52, aheart rate of 104 beats/minute, a respiratory rate of 20breaths/minute, clear lungs, and an SpO2 of 98%. The patient iscurrently connected to the bedside monitor with a nasal cannula at 2L/minute in place and intravenous fluids (0.9 NS) being
administered at a rate of 10 mL/hour. Which of the followingsequences of interventions would be the most appropriate for thenurse to follow at this time?(A) Give a chewable aspirin, do an ECG, and then start a fluid bolus.(B) Give NTG sublingual, increase the FiO2, and then givemorphine.(C) Do an ECG, give NTG sublingual, and then give a chewableaspirin.(D) Start a fluid bolus, give a chewable aspirin, and then do an ECG.28. The location or type of an acute MI is often associated with specificclinical findings. Which of the following statements related to thelocation of an MI is TRUE?(A) An anterior MI is often associated with heart blocks orbradyarrhythmias.(B) An inferior MI is often associated with right ventricular wallinfarction.(C) A lateral MI is most likely to be associated with a posterior MI.(D) A posterior MI is most likely to lead to the complication of heartfailure.29. Which of the following statements is accurate regarding heartvalves?(A) The aortic valve is closed during systole.(B) The mitral valve is closed during systole.(C) The mitral valve is closed during diastole.(D) The aortic valve is open during diastole.
30. The following drugs are all considered positive inotropic drugs thatprimarily affect the beta-1 receptors in the heart EXCEPT:(A) dopamine drip at 12 mcg/kg/min dose.(B) dopamine drip at 5 mcg/kg/min dose.(C) dobutamine drip at 7 mcg/kg/min dose.(D) milrinone at 7 mcg/kg/min dose.
Answer Key1. B2. C3. C4. D5. A6. B7. B8. A9. B10. D11. B12. B13. C14. A15. B16. D17. A18. B19. C20. B21. A22. C23. B24. B
25. C26. A27. D28. B29. B30. A
Answers and Explanations1. (B) Coronary artery reperfusion (due to either PCI orfibrinolysis) results in an elevation of, NOT a decrease in,creatine kinase (CK) or troponin. The theory is that the return ofblood flow distal to the occlusion can result in a “reperfusioninjury” of muscle, elevating cardiac biomarkers. The other 3choices are indicators of successful reperfusion.2. (C) The patient in this scenario is having an acute anterior wallMI. A beta blocker is beneficial for an acute MI, as these agentsdecrease the work of the heart and increase the threshold forventricular fibrillation. Although it is a beta-adrenergic blockerlike metoprolol, propranolol is NOT a cardioselective betablocker. It affects beta receptors in heart muscle AND lungtissue. Therefore, it is more likely to cause bronchoconstrictionthan a cardioselective beta blocker. The other 3 choices (acardioselective beta blocker, an antiplatelet, and ananticoagulant) are indicated for an acute MI, such as the onethat the patient in this scenario is experiencing.3. (C) The patient is having an acute anterior MI, which isgenerally due to LAD occlusion. The LAD supplies the bundle ofHis, so an LAD occlusion could result in a second-degree TypeII heart block. If symptomatic bradycardia were to occur, thepatient may require transcutaneous pacing. The other 3 typesof heart blocks are due to SA node or AV node ischemia, whichgenerally occur with an RCA occlusion (inferior wall MI).
4. (D) Dilated cardiomyopathy is likely to result in systolicdysfunction, which decreases contractility, causescompensatory arterial constriction, and results in a higher leftventricular preload. To treat this, therapy is aimed at increasingcontractility, decreasing afterload (arterial constriction), anddecreasing preload that is too high.5. (A) An abnormal level of sodium does NOT cause QTprolongation. In contrast, a low level of magnesium, potassium,or calcium may cause QT prolongation and may result intorsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia and, if self-limiting,a transient syncopal episode.6. (B) The pain described in the scenario is typical of the paincaused by pericarditis. Dressler’s syndrome is the pericarditisthat may result after an acute MI.7. (B) Retroperitoneal bleeding may cause signs of hypovolemiaand hypovolemic shock, as described in this scenario. It may bea complication of a PCI if the femoral artery is the access siteduring the procedure. Only this problem results in severe backpain; none of the other 3 choices results in back pain.8. (A) The location of the murmur, at the apex of the heart(midclavicular, 5th ICS), is one clue to this answer. In addition,regurgitation occurs when the valve should be closed, and themitral valve should be closed during systole. Mitral valvestenosis, choice (C), occurs when the mitral valve is open.Additionally, mitral valve stenosis cannot be acute; it developsgradually.9. (B) The first letter indicates chamber paced (ventricle). Thesecond letter indicates chamber sensed (ventricle). The third
letter indicates the response to sensing (inhibited in response tosensing).10. (D) The scenario describes a patient having an acute inferiorwall MI, which is generally due to occlusion of the RCA. TheRCA occlusion may result in papillary muscle dysfunction orrupture of the mitral valve because it supplies the area of theleft ventricle where this valve is attached. Although RV infarctcould result in RCA occlusion, RV infarct does not result in aholosystolic murmur at the apex of the heart or lung crackles.11. (B) Cardiogenic shock results in a decrease in cardiac outputwith a resultant drop in coronary artery perfusion andcompensatory vasoconstriction. The deflation of the balloon thatis placed into the descending aorta is beneficial. Deflationdecreases afterload and work of the left ventricle. Inflation ofthe balloon is beneficial because it “boluses” blood into thecoronary arteries, increasing perfusion.12. (B) The patient’s response to the arrhythmia will determinewhether treatment needs to be emergent and what thetreatment will be. Vagal maneuvers (e.g., bearing down) are notknown to be effective for atrial fibrillation.13. (C) PCI would address the cause of the problem, not only treatthe signs and symptoms. Selection of the other 3 choicespresumes that the patient had serious signs and symptoms. Donot read into the questions.14. (A) In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, there is a problem withfilling. A decrease in heart rate provided by a beta blocker suchas metoprolol would increase the filling time. Diastolicdysfunction does NOT cause a problem with ejection, and the
EF is normal. The other 3 choices may be indicated for systolicdysfunction.15. (B) This scenario describes an acute anterior STEMI, generallycaused by an occlusion of the LAD. This type of MI is mostlikely to result in a VSD. Additionally, the location of the murmuris important. Mitral valve disease–related problems do NOTcause murmurs to be loudest at the left sternal border, whereasa VSD would result in a murmur at this location.16. (D) This scenario describes a patient having an acute inferiorSTEMI, generally due to RCA occlusion. An RCA occlusionmay result in an RV infarct, which this patient has signs of(hypotension with clear lungs). The definitive treatment isemergent PCI. Fluid administration will help increase coronaryartery perfusion by correcting hypotension and ensureadequate RV preload. A right-sided ECG may help confirm theRV infarct. Nitroglycerin, diuretics, and morphine may decreasepreload, which would worsen the hypotension.17. (A) This patient has signs of organ dysfunction (heart failure)secondary to extreme hypertension. Therefore, he has ahypertensive crisis or emergency. The BP needs to beemergently decreased. Most often, this treatment is best donein a critical care setting.18. (B) This patient presents with signs of heart failure due todiastolic dysfunction (hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy,EF > 40%). This patient has a problem with FILLING, notejection. Digoxin, a positive inotrope, may increase wall stressand worsen filling of the left ventricle.
19. (C) Contralateral motor weakness and aphasia may be signs ofcerebrovascular insufficiency due to left stent patency issues. Aright cerebral hemorrhage (choice (A)) would result in left-sidedmotor weakness and is not usually associated with post-carotidstent placement. The signs and symptoms of hyperperfusionsyndrome (choice (B)) do not include contralateral motorweakness. There were no signs of hypovolemia (choice (D)),such as hypotension or oliguria, described in the question. 20. (B) The signs described are those of chronic right-sided heartfailure. Acute right ventricular failure may result in JVD, but notperipheral edema or abdominal discomfort (which is due to liverengorgement).21. (A) The signs described in the scenario are those of cardiactamponade. The treatment for cardiac tamponade for a post-opopen heart surgery patient is a return to the OR to drain thepericardial fluid that has accumulated. Development of thisproblem in other patient populations would necessitate anemergent pericardiocentesis to drain the fluid.22. (C) A right ventricular infarction that is large enough to causeRV failure causes a problem with RV emptying, leading to anelevated right atrial pressure. This causes jugular venousdistention. Choices (A) and (D) are signs of left ventricularfailure. Choice (B) is a sign of dehydration.23. (B) Pulsus paradoxus is fluctuation of the systolic bloodpressure with inspiration and expiration by more than 12mmHg, best seen when an arterial line is in place. Inspirationincreases thoracic pressure. When combined with fluidsurrounding the heart in cardiac tamponade, inspiration further
decreases venous return to the heart, leading to a drop insystolic pressure by > 12 mmHg during the inspiratory phase ofbreathing. Pulsus alternans (choice (A)) is characterized by achange in amplitude of the systolic waveform from beat to beat,usually indicative of severe left ventricular failure. Pulsusmagnus (choice (C)) is a bounding pulse. Pulsus bisferiens(choice (D)) is a double pulse and is not covered on the AdultCCRN exam.24. (B) This scenario describes the development of atrial fibrillationwith a controlled ventricular response and a stable BP. Evenwith a normal BP, the development of atrial fibrillation drops thecardiac output by 20% to 25% due to a loss in “atrial kick”provided by a normal sinus rhythm. A cardiac glycoside (suchas digoxin) may be beneficial since it is a weak positive inotropethat may compensate for the loss of atrial kick, and calciumchannel blockers will keep the heart rate controlled. Pressorsare not needed in this case. The use of both beta blockers andcalcium channel blockers would decrease the heart rate toomuch. ACE inhibitors would offer no benefit in this case.25. (C) An S3 heart sound in an adult is indicative of high leftventricular pressure. A new cough and lung crackles are signsof pulmonary edema secondary to elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (PAOP), although these may be signs ofother problems, such as pulmonary fibrosis. The EF is less than40% in systolic heart failure.26. (A) The patient’s clinical status describes a stable BP, but thedevelopment of a bradyarrhythmia, specifically a complete heartblock with a ventricular rate of 30 beats/minute. This is usually
seen with RCA disease, generally associated with an inferiorMI. A patient assessment will determine treatment.Transcutaneous pacing would be an appropriate treatment foran unstable patient with this arrhythmia.27. (D) This clinical description may be that of acute coronarysyndrome complicated by hypotension. Addressing thehypotension is a priority since this is further decreasingcoronary artery perfusion. A fluid bolus would address thehypotension, and no contraindications seem to be present for afluid bolus since the lungs are clear. Aspirin is indicated foracute chest pain and could be given while preparing to do theECG, which is needed to help make the diagnosis.28. (B) Since most inferior MIs are due to RCA occlusion and theRCA also supplies blood to the right ventricular muscle wall, aninferior MI is associated with RV infarct.29. (B) During systole (left ventricular ejection), the aortic valve isopen, allowing for ejection. The mitral valve is closed at thistime. The mitral valve is open during filling (diastole).30. (A) At high doses (> 10 mcg/kg/min), dopamine stimulatesalpha receptors in the arteries and causes vasoconstriction.The other 3 drugs/doses affect mainly the beta-1 receptors inthe heart, producing a positive inotropic effect.
4
