Hemodynamics Concepts


One of the most important keys to Success is having the discipline to
do what you know you should do, even when you don’t feel like doing
it.

                                                              —Unknown


Hemodynamics is included in the Cardiovascular section of the Adult
CCRN test blueprint. However, this topic has been placed after the
Cardiovascular Concepts, Respiratory Concepts, and Multisystem
Concepts chapters in this book because each of these content areas
includes hemodynamic concepts.


Although most critically ill patients do not receive invasive
hemodynamic monitoring, ALL patients have hemodynamics that
reflect their specific problems. These, to a degree, determine the plan
of care. Hemodynamics and invasive hemodynamic monitoring are
included in numerous Adult CCRN exam questions.

✰ The equation in Figure 6-1 is the foundation of hemodynamics. The
      cardiac output (CO) is equal to the heart rate (HR) times the stroke
      volume (SV). The SV is dependent upon the preload, afterload,
      and contractility of the ventricles of the heart.
Figure 6-1. Regulation of hemodynamics
Critical Points
  The normal cardiac output (CO) is 4 L to 8 L per minute. If it becomes
  critically low, the blood pressure will decrease.
     Cardiac index (CI) takes into account the body surface area (BSA)
     and is a more meaningful value than CO.
     The normal CI is 2.5 to 4.0 L/min/m2.
  As heart rate (HR) increases, CO increases up to a point. The point
  is determined by the patient’s age or the condition of his or her
  ventricles. Generally, 130–170 beats per minute is the maximal heart
  rate originating from the sinoatrial (SA) node that is attainable for
  most people.
    Extreme bradycardia results in low CO and hypotension.
    An increase in HR is the first sign of compensation for a low CO.
    This will occur before the BP drops. Patients on beta blocker drugs,
    or any drug that decreases heart rate, may not be able to
    compensate as well for a problem that is decreasing cardiac
     output.
     Conversely, extreme tachycardia will also decrease the CO no
     matter the patient’s age or the condition of his or her ventricles.
     Why? A loss of diastolic filling time occurs. If diastolic filling time is
     decreased, the ventricles do not have time to fill, ventricular
     preload drops, and ultimately the ventricle cannot put out what is
     not delivered.
  As stroke volume increases, CO increases. The stroke volume (SV)
  is how many mL per beat the left ventricle ejects. It is determined by
  the preload, afterload, and contractility. The normal SV is 50–100 mL
  per beat.
   Preload
     Preload is the volume/pressure in the ventricle at the end of
     diastole after the AV valves close, just prior to ejection. The right
     atrial (RA) pressure or central venous pressure (CVP) reflects the
     right ventricular preload. The PAOP reflects the left ventricular
     preload.
     As preload increases, the SV and CO increase up to a point.
     Too high of a preload may lead to heart failure.
     In general, preload will seldom be elevated if the heart is disease-
     free and if there are no metabolic abnormalities.
   Afterload
     Afterload is the pressure (resistance) against which the ventricle
     must pump to open the valve (pulmonic or aortic).
     Afterload is clinically measured by the pulmonary vascular
     resistance (PVR) for the right ventricle or the systemic vascular
     resistance (SVR) for the left ventricle.
     As afterload increases, the SV and CO decrease.
   Contractility
     Contractility is the contractile force of the myofibrils, independent of
     preload and afterload.
     As contractility increases, the SV and CO increase.
✰ For the Adult CCRN exam, you need to know normal hemodynamic
  values and how various drugs and therapies affect preload, afterload,
  and contractility. Therefore, you need to know how these drugs and
  therapies affect stroke volume and, ultimately, cardiac output.

Table 6-1 summarizes normal hemodynamics, and Table 6-2 outlines
how various clinical problems affect hemodynamics. Table 6-3 lists the
hemodynamic effects of various cardiovascular agents. You must have
an understanding of this information, as it is the foundation for patient
management.

  ✰ Table 6-1. Normal Hemodynamic and Oxygenation Parameters
“Normal” differs somewhat from resource to resource. Those values
listed in Table 6-1 are generally accepted.
  You do not need to memorize formulas for the Adult CCRN exam.

✰ Table 6-2. Hemodynamic Profiles for Select Abnormal Conditions




  ✰ Table 6-3. Hemodynamic Effects of Various Cardiovascular
                          Agents
There will be questions that test your knowledge on appropriate
interventions for various abnormal hemodynamics and the significance of
various oxygenation parameters. Table 6-4 summarizes therapies for
alterations in hemodynamics, and Table 6-5 outlines oxygenation
parameters.

     ✰ Table 6-4. Therapies for Alterations in Hemodynamics*




         Table 6-5. Hemodynamic Oxygenation Parameters
You do not need to memorize formulas for the Adult CCRN exam, but
you should know the normal values and their clinical relevance.
SvO2: normal is 60% to 75% (too low or too high is BAD)
Sustained changes, not brief changes (e.g., during position change),
are significant (Table 6-6).

                   Table 6-6. SvO2 Changes
✰ For the Adult CCRN exam, concentrate on studying the normal and
  abnormal hemodynamic ranges. Also, study the therapies that affect
  hemodynamics. Note that printed waveform strips, such as the one in
  Figure 6-2, are seldom included on this exam.




            Figure 6-2. Normal pulmonary artery waves

Acute mitral valve insufficiency: In the presence of mitral valve
insufficiency, the PAOP waveform changes appearance. When the PA
catheter balloon is inflated, giant V-waves appear on the PAOP tracing
(see Figure 6-3).

   The PAOP is read at the A-wave, not at the V-wave.
           Figure 6-3. Giant V-waves on the PAOP waveform
If you see the term “giant V-waves” on the exam, the problem is mitral
valve insufficiency (regurgitation). As you should recall from the
Cardiovascular Concepts chapter, this is often associated with acute
inferior wall myocardial infarction/papillary muscle dysfunction/rupture.
Square Wave Test (Dynamic Response Test)
  The dynamic response test, also called the “square wave test,” is
  performed to assess the accuracy of the hemodynamic monitoring
  system. This is done immediately after catheter insertion, at the
  beginning of each shift after zeroing the system and whenever values
  are questionable. The strip recorder is started. Then, the flush device
  is squeezed and immediately released. The dynamic response that is
  documented on the strip is then examined.
  For the exam, you will only need to know what the square wave test
  is and the implications if it is overdamped or underdamped. You will
  not be given strips to assess.
  Overdamped wave response:
     Results in a falsely decreased systolic pressure and a falsely high
     diastolic pressure as well as poorly defined components of the
     pressure tracing, such as a diminished or absent dicrotic notch
     May be due to air or a blood clot in the system, loose connections,
     loss of air in the pressure bag, or kinking of the catheter/tubing
     system
  Underdamped wave response (less common clinically):
     Results in a falsely high systolic pressure (overshoot), a possibly
     falsely low diastolic pressure, and “ringing” artifacts on the
     waveform
     May be due to pinpoint air bubbles in the system, add-on tubing, or
     a defective transducer

Now that you have reviewed the key hemodynamics concepts, go to
the Practice Questions. Answer the questions, and then check your
answers. Continue to review the information until you answer 80% of
the practice questions correctly.
Practice Questions

 For questions 1–3


The following hemodynamic profile has been obtained for a patient:


 BP         112/60 mmHg

 PA         44/24 mmHg

 SVR        1,600 dynes/s/cm–5

 SVI        23 mL/m2

 RA         3 mmHg

 PAOP       22 mmHg

 CI         1.9 L/min/m2

 SvO2       0.58

   1. Based on this hemodynamic profile, which of the following
      conclusions is CORRECT?

       (A) The patient is hypovolemic.
       (B) The patient has evidence of left ventricular failure.
       (C) The patient seems to have sepsis.
       (D) The patient has developed ARDS.
 2. Shortly after obtaining the values above, the nurse inflated
   (wedged) the catheter balloon and observed giant V-waves on
   the PAOP tracing. What is the most likely problem?

    (A) The patient has evidence of mitral valve regurgitation.
    (B) The PA catheter has fallen back into the RV.
    (C) The PA catheter needs to be advanced.
    (D) The PAOP seems to be 40 mmHg.

 3. What would be the most appropriate intervention
    for this patient?

    (A) Call the physician for possible catheter repositioning.
    (B) Document the strip, administer the PRN order for
        furosemide (Lasix) for a PAOP > 16 mmHg, and reassess
        in 1 hour.
    (C) Label the balloon “do not wedge.”
    (D) Document the strip, interpret the pressure, and notify the
        physician.


 4. A patient with continuous SvO2 monitoring has sustained a
   decrease in SvO2 to 0.50. Priority interventions would include
   each of the following EXCEPT:

    (A) checking the urine output.
    (B) checking the BP and the CO/CI.
    (C) checking O2 sat with a pulse oximeter (SpO2).
    (D) checking the temperature.


For questions 5–8
It is important to integrate hemodynamic parameters with each other
and not evaluate parameters individually in isolation. Assess the
following hemodynamic profiles. Match each profile with the clinical
problem listed below that is most likely associated with it.


  (BP = blood pressure; HR = heart rate; CVP = central venous
  pressure; PAOP = pulmonary artery occlusion pressure; SVR =
  systemic vascular resistance; CI = cardiac index; SV = stroke
  volume)




   5. (A) hypovolemic shock
      (B) cardiogenic shock
      (C) acute right ventricular failure
      (D) septic shock
  6. (A) hypovolemic shock
     (B) cardiogenic shock
     (C) acute right ventricular failure
     (D) septic shock

  7. (A) hypovolemic shock
     (B) cardiogenic shock
     (C) acute right ventricular failure
     (D) septic shock

  8. (A) hypovolemic shock
     (B) cardiogenic shock
     (C) acute right ventricular failure
     (D) septic shock


 For questions 9–20


Match the drug with its primary hemodynamic effect. Consult Table
6-3.


  9. ____ Dopamine 5–10 mcg/kg/min

 10. ____ Dopamine > 10 mcg/kg/min


 11. ____ Dobutamine

 12. ____ Nitroglycerin 20 mcg/min

 13. ____ Norepinephrine
 14. ____ Beta blockers

 15. ____ Nitroprusside (choose 2)


 16. ____ ACE inhibitors

 17. ____ Furosemide

 18. ____ Fluid bolus


 19. ____ Milrinone

 20. ____ Morphine

     (A) increase preload
     (B) decrease preload
     (C) increase afterload
     (D) decrease afterload
     (E) increase contractility
     (F) decrease contractility


 For questions 21 and 22


Mr. A, a 66-year-old male, presents S/P colectomy for colon cancer.
He has the following results upon examination:

    MAP of 58 mmHg (↓ from 70) after 2 L of 0.9 normal saline; heart
    rate of 112 beats/minute; respiratory rate of 34 breaths/minute;
  temperature of 38.9°C; urine output < 0.5 mL/kg for the past 2
  hours; lungs are clear; skin is warm and dry; WBC is 20,000;
  66% segs; 24% bands; 7% lymphs; blood cultures are positive
  for gram-negative organisms

21. This patient does not have a pulmonary artery catheter. If he
   did, and his systemic vascular resistance was measured, what
   SVR should the nurse anticipate this patient would have?

    (A) 2,550 dynes/s/cm–5
    (B) 1,550 dynes/s/cm–5
    (C) 550 dynes/s/cm–5
    (D) 900 dynes/s/cm–5

22. What hemodynamic changes are consistent with this patient’s
   clinical status?

    (A) increase in preload and decrease in afterload
    (B) decrease in preload and increase in afterload
    (C) decrease in preload and decrease in afterload
    (D) decrease in CO due to impaired contractility

23. Ms. B, a 78-year-old female, is admitted with the following
   clinical findings:

       Chief complaint of SOB and fatigue
       Bibasilar crackles noted with S3 gallop
       Chest radiograph shows venous congestion and
       cardiomegaly
       Weight increase of 20 pounds over the last 2 weeks
     Which of the following hemodynamic alterations is found with
     her presenting problems, and what treatment and rationale for
     that treatment are indicated?

      (A) increased afterload, decreased contractility, and decreased
           preload; nesiritide to increase contractility
      (B) decreased afterload, decreased contractility, and increased
          preload; furosemide (Lasix) to increase afterload
      (C) decreased afterload, increased contractility, and increased
           preload; amiodarone to decrease preload
      (D) increased afterload, decreased contractility, and increased
          preload; dobutamine to increase contractility


 For questions 24 and 25


Mr. C, a 54-year-old male, presents with near-syncope. He has no
significant past medical history. He sought medical help today after
almost fainting in the shower. Clinical findings include:

   Blood pressure of 98/58 mmHg; heart rate of 108 beats/minute
   with S1 and S2 heart sounds; respiratory rate of 18
   breaths/minute; temperature of 37.1°C
   Alert and orientated × 3; lungs are clear; skin is cool and dry; neck
   veins are flat
   Thirsty with dry oral mucous membranes; abdomen is soft/non-
   tender with hyperactive bowel sounds
 24. The next vital sign assessment reveals a blood pressure of
     88/60 mmHg. Which of the following does Mr. C seem to need?
    (A) Volume expansion is needed to increase preload and
        increase myocardial stretch.
    (B) Pressors are needed to increase afterload and increase
        myocardial stretch.
    (C) Volume expansion is needed to decrease afterload and
        increase myocardial stretch.
    (D) Pressors are needed to decrease preload and decrease
        myocardial stretch.

25. The nurse suspects that the arterial line waveform appearance
   has changed. The recommended method for assessing the
   adequacy of the catheter/tubing system is to:

    (A) perform a square wave test.
    (B) zero balance.
    (C) check a cuff pressure.
    (D) calibrate the monitor.
Answer Key
 1. B
 2. A
 3. D
 4. A
 5. B
 6. D
 7. C
 8. A
 9. E
10. C
11. E
12. B
13. C
14. F
15. B, D
16. D
17. B
18. A
19. E
20. B
21. C
22. C
23. D
24. A
25. A
Answers and Explanations
 1. (B) Although there are several hemodynamic abnormalities, the
    key here is the PAOP of 22 mmHg. Left heart failure is the only
   problem of those listed that would result in an elevated PAOP.
   Since the LV is in failure and is not emptying normally, there is a
   backup of volume, reflected as a higher pressure on the left
   side of the heart. This, in turn, causes the pulmonary capillary
   pressures to exceed 18 mmHg and cause pulmonary edema.
    The low CI causes the elevated PAOP. However, other
    problems, such as hypovolemia, may also result in a low CI.
    The SVR is high due to compensatory vasoconstriction, which
    in this case seems to be maintaining the blood pressure.
 2. (A) The giant V-waves are due to mitral valve insufficiency or
    regurgitation, which may be acute or chronic. The PAOP is
    measured, however, at the A-wave.
 3. (D) If the patient develops acute mitral valve insufficiency, the
    physician needs to be notified. There is no problem with the PA
    catheter. The patient does not automatically require a diuretic
    (but he might). The balloon is OK, so it doesn’t need to be
    labeled.
 4. (A) The SvO2 is low; therefore, the reason for that needs to be
   determined. A drop in blood pressure or cardiac output, a
   decrease in the arterial oxygen saturation, or a fever are
   possible causes. Urine output is not directly associated with a
   decrease in the SvO2.
 5. (B) The key indicator is the elevated PAOP with the low CI. The
    SVR is elevated as a compensatory response.
 6. (D) The key indicator is the low SVR (massive dilation) with the
    higher-than-normal CI.
 7. (C) The key indicator is the high CVP with a low PAOP due to
    poor RV output. Since volume is not getting to the left heart, the
    left heart pressure (PAOP) is low and the CI is low.
 8. (A) The key indicator is the low CVP and PAOP with the
    elevated SVR as a compensatory response to the hypovolemia.
 9. (E) “Midrange” dopamine stimulates the beta-1 receptors in the
    heart to increase contractility.
10. (C) High-dose dopamine stimulates the alpha receptors in the
    arteries to cause vasoconstriction and to increase afterload.
11. (E) Dobutamine stimulates the beta-1 receptors in the heart and
    increases contractility.
12. (B) Nitroglycerin at lower doses causes venodilatation and
    results in a decrease in preload. Only at higher doses does it
    dilate the arterial vessels.
13. (C) Norepinephrine is a potent vasoconstrictor as it stimulates
    the alpha receptors of the arteries and increases afterload.
14. (F) Beta blockers block the beta-1 receptors of the heart,
    blocking the adrenergic effects of the autonomic nervous
    system from affecting the heart. This results in decreased
    contractility as well as a decrease in heart rate.
15. B, D Nitroprusside dilates both the venous and arterial sides of
    the vascular system, resulting in a decrease in both preload and
    afterload.
16. (D) ACE inhibitors (or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors)
    block the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II.
    Angiotensin II is a potent constrictor. By blocking its formation,
    the arterial vessels dilate more, resulting in a decrease in
    afterload.
17. (B) Furosemide is a potent loop diuretic and venodilator. The
    resulting diuresis and venodilation cause a reduction in preload.
18. (A) A fluid bolus increases volume in the vasculature, thereby
    increasing the preload.
19. (E) Milrinone, in the class of phosphodiesterase inhibitors,
    stimulates cardiac muscle contraction and increases
    contractility.
20. (B) Morphine mildly dilates the venous bed, thereby reducing
    preload. It may be used in low doses to treat heart failure.
21. (C) The scenario describes a patient with septic shock as
    evidenced by an infection and hypotension, despite 2 L of fluid.
    The endotoxins cause massive vasodilation, which results in a
    loss of vascular tone, which leads to a low SVR.
22. (C) Septic shock causes massive vasodilation, which decreases
    afterload. It also causes capillary leakage with a loss of volume
    in the vasculature, resulting in a decrease in preload.
23. (D) The patient scenario reflects heart failure. To compensate
    for the reduced cardiac output, a patient with heart failure
    vasoconstricts. Therefore, afterload is high. The heart muscle
    loses contractility, so contractility is decreased. Due to a low
    ejection fraction, the left heart pressure increases, resulting in
    lung crackles, S3 heart sound, and increased preload. A
    positive inotropic drug, such as dobutamine (as well as other
    drugs), may be indicated.
24. (A) The patient scenario is one of hypovolemia. Fluid
    administration will increase preload (fill up the tank), which will
    in turn improve myocardial stretch. This increase in stretch to
    increase output is the Frank-Starling law of the heart. Since the
    patient is volume depleted, the systemic vascular resistance
    (SVR) is most likely high because vasoconstriction occurs as a
    compensatory response to maintain the arterial blood pressure.
    Pressors should not be used in the presence of hypovolemia.
25. (A) The square wave (or dynamic response) test provides
    information as to whether the catheter/tubing system is
    optimally damped, overdamped, or underdamped. Then,
    troubleshooting needs to be done accordingly. Cuff pressures
    should not be used to verify the accuracy of intra-arterial
    pressures.
