Multisystem Concepts


By failing to prepare, you are preparing to fail.

                                                    —Benjamin Franklin



                  MULTISYSTEM TEST BLUEPRINT

     Multisystem 14% of total test              21 questions


   → Acid-base imbalance*
   → Bariatric complications**
   → Comorbidity in patients with transplant history
   → End-of-life care
   → Healthcare-associated conditions (e.g., VAE, CAUTI,
     CLABSI)
   → Hypotension
   → Infectious diseases
        Influenza (e.g., pandemic or epidemic)
        Multi-drug resistant organisms (e.g., MRSA, VRE, CRE)
   → Life-threatening maternal/fetal complications (e.g.,
     eclampsia, HELLP syndrome, postpartum hemorrhage,
     amniotic embolism)
   → Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS)
   → Multisystem trauma
    → Pain: acute, chronic
    → Post-intensive care syndrome (PICS)
    → Sepsis
    → Septic shock
    → Shock states
        Distributive (e.g., anaphylactic, neurogenic)
        Hypovolemic
    → Sleep disruption (including sensory overload)
    → Thermoregulation
    → Toxic ingestion/inhalations (e.g., drug/alcohol overdose)
    → Toxin/drug exposure (including allergies)

    *This topic is also covered in the Respiratory Concepts
    chapter of this book.

    **This topic is covered in the Gastrointestinal Concepts
    chapter of this book.



          MULTISYSTEM TESTABLE NURSING ACTIONS

□     Manage continuous temperature monitoring
□     Provide end-of-life and palliative care
□     Recognize risk factors and manage malignant hyperthermia
□     Recognize indications for, and manage, patients undergoing:
        Continuous sedation
        Intermittent sedation
        Neuromuscular blockade agents
   Procedural sedation—minimal
   Procedural sedation—moderate
   Targeted temperature management (previously known as
   therapeutic hypothermia)

The number of questions in the multisystem section of the
Adult CCRN test blueprint has significantly increased in
recent years. There are now 21 multisystem-related questions
on this exam (as opposed to only 12 previously). Therefore,
plan on studying the content in this chapter for approximately
21 hours.
Shock
Overview
  Although blood pressure (hypotension) is generally thought of when
  discussing shock, shock is actually a cellular disease due to either
  inadequate perfusion (the oxygen demand is greater than the oxygen
  delivered) or the inability of cells to utilize the delivered oxygen
  (issues with oxygen utilization/consumption).
  Refer to Figure 5-1 to study the pathophysiology of shock.




                Figure 5-1. Pathophysiology of shock

  There are 3 stages of all types of shock:
   1. Compensatory
   2. Progressive
   3. Refractory
The rapidity with which a patient progresses through these stages
varies depending upon many factors.
During the compensatory stage of shock (Figures 5-2 and 5-3), the
blood pressure (BP) is maintained as a result of 2 mechanisms:
stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system and activation of the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).
Sympathetic Nervous System Stimulation




    Figure 5-2. Physiology of compensatory stage of shock
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
(RAAS) Activation




    Figure 5-3. Compensatory stage of shock due to RAAS
Clinical Signs/Symptoms of the Stages of Shock
Compensatory Stage of Shock (Blood Pressure
Maintained)
  Tachycardia
  Tachypnea, respiratory alkalosis
  Normal PaO2
  Oliguria
  Skin is pale, cool (except in early sepsis)
  Restlessness, anxiety
  Complaints of thirst
  Remember, BP maintained!


Progressive Stage of Shock (Compensatory
Mechanisms Failing)
  Hypotension
  Worsening tachycardia, tachypnea, oliguria
  Metabolic acidosis
  Decreased PaO2
  Clammy, mottled skin
  Further change in LOC
  The patient may complain of nausea.


Refractory Stage of Shock
  The patient is not responsive to interventions.
  Severe systemic hypoperfusion, multiple organ
  dysfunction syndrome (MODS)
The patient may survive shock, but die from failure of one or more
organs.
  Pulmonary (ARDS)
  Kidney (acute tubular necrosis)
  Heart (failure, ischemia)
  Hematologic (disseminated intravascular coagulation)
  Neurological (encephalopathy, stroke)
  Liver (failure)
Types of Shock
  Hypovolemic
  Septic
  Anaphylactic
  Neurogenic (seldom tested on this exam)
  Cardiogenic (covered in the Cardiovascular Concepts chapter)
  Obstructive (covered in the Cardiovascular Concepts and Respiratory
  Concepts chapters)
    Tension pneumothorax
    Massive pulmonary embolism
    Cardiac tamponade
Hypovolemic Shock
   Critical reduction in the circulating intravascular volume, leading to
   inadequate tissue perfusion
   Most common type of shock
     Internal causes—third-spacing or pooling in the intravascular
     compartment
     External causes—hemorrhage, GI or renal losses, burns, excessive
     diaphoresis
   Hypovolemia effects on pulse pressure:
     Systolic decreases, diastolic maintains or elevates, NARROW pulse
     pressure
     Example:
    — Baseline is 130/80
    — Volume loss → 110/80, 100/80, 90/70
   Hemodynamics
     ↓ BP
     ↓ Pulse pressure
     ↓ Right atrial pressure (CVP)
     ↓ Cardiac output, O2 delivery
     ↓ Left atrial pressure (PAOP)
     ↓ SvO2
     ↑ Systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
Everything is decreased except SVR.
Treatment of Hypovolemic Shock
  Identify the etiology and correct it, if possible.
  Replace volume appropriately, “Fill up the tank!”
    Rapid and vigorous volume loading
    Requires at least 2 large bore IV sites (hemorrhagic); a central line is
    not necessary but may assist fluid replacement.
    Use a fluid warmer if > 2,000 mL of fluids are administered in 1 hour
    (ALL fluids for trauma patients).
  Avoid use of vasopressors.
  Fluid resuscitation: goal is to maintain O2 delivery (DO2) and O2 uptake
  (VO2) into tissue and sustain aerobic metabolism.
  Fluid resuscitate to clinical targets (e.g., decreased tachycardia,
  increased urine output)
    Use isotonic fluid: 0.9 normal saline or lactated Ringer’s.
    Which is better? There are advantages and disadvantages to each
    (Table 5-1).

     Table 5-1. Comparison of Normal Saline and Lactated Ringer’s
Resuscitation endpoints
 MAP ≥ 65 mmHg
 CVP ~ 6 mmHg (not well-defined)
 Urine OP 0.5 mL/kg/hr
  Heart rate decreased
  Hgb > 7.0 g/dL and coagulation/platelet abnormalities are corrected.
 — Hemoglobin and hematocrit measurements are not accurate during
       active blood loss.

NOTE

NO PRESSORS for hypovolemic shock! The SVR is already high due to
compensatory mechanisms.
Hemorrhagic Shock
The severity of hemorrhagic shock is categorized into 4 classes (Table 5-
2).


             Table 5-2. Classification of Hemorrhagic Shock




   Class I: treat with crystalloids
   Class II: treat with crystalloids
   Class III: treat with crystalloids + blood
   Class IV: treat with crystalloids + blood
Treatment of Hemorrhagic (Hypovolemic) Shock
  STOP the bleeding.
  Blood transfusion
    Optimal hemoglobin (Hgb) threshold remains controversial, and Hgb
    levels are NOT reliable during active bleeding.
    7.0 g/dL Hgb is fairly well established in the critically ill.
    Goal may be higher in the presence of:
  — Active bleeding
  — Severe hypoxemia
  — Myocardial ischemia
  — Lactic acidosis
  Packed red blood cells (PRBCs), unlike whole blood, do not have
  plasma or platelets; therefore, the patient will need a replacement of the
  coagulation components of blood with a transfusion of multiple units of
  PRBCs.
    Fresh frozen plasma
    Platelets
    Cryoprecipitate
  Risks of blood product administration
    Hemolytic and non-hemolytic reactions
    Transfusion-mediated immunomodulation
    Viral infection transmission
    Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI)
   Hypothermia—WARM blood products to prevent this
  — Consequences of hypothermia
      ➤ Impairment of red cell deformability
      ➤ Platelet dysfunction
      ➤ Increase in affinity of hemoglobin to hold onto O2
 Coagulopathy: monitor coagulation status, provide plasma and
 platelets
 Hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia (citrate in transfused blood binds
 ionized Ca++ and Mg++)
 Banked blood does not have adequate 2,3-DPG. What is the
 consequence?
— Shifts the oxyhemoglobin-dissociation curve to the LEFT (see the
  Respiratory Concepts chapter); increases the affinity of
   hemoglobin to hold onto O2.
Massive Transfusion Protocols
  Designed to provide rapid infusion of large quantities of blood products
  to restore oxygen delivery (DO2), oxygen utilization (VO2), and tissue
  perfusion (blood pressure)
  Indications include traumatic injuries, ruptured abdominal aortic or
  thoracic aortic aneurysms, liver transplant, OB emergencies.
  Definition: 10 units of RBCs in 24 hours or 5 units in less than 3 hours
  Mortality > 50%
  Need to prevent the triad of death:
    Hypothermia
    Acidosis
    Coagulopathy
Sepsis and Septic Shock
Most acute care settings have developed protocols for the treatment of
sepsis and septic shock to provide timely, evidence-based, life-saving
treatment for this patient population and to meet the requirements set
forth by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).
Whereas older medical studies stressed the importance of CVP and
ScvO2 measurements, more recent medical studies that discuss sepsis
and septic shock place less importance on those measurements and
instead stress fluid resuscitation, timeliness of obtaining blood cultures
and serum lactate level measurements, the administration of antibiotics,
and the initiation of vasopressors if necessary.
Overview
  There are at least 1.7 million incidences of sepsis in American adults
  annually, with ~ 270,000 deaths per year (as per the CDC, Sept.
  2021).
  Sepsis is the #1 cause of death in the non-coronary ICUs.
  As per the CDC, 1 in 3 patients who die in a hospital have sepsis.
  Numbers are expected to increase due to high incidences of sepsis in
  the older adult population.
  The current Adult CCRN test blueprint expects you to understand
  sepsis and septic shock. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
  (SIRS) and severe sepsis are not included in the latest blueprint
  (most likely due to the changes introduced in the Sepsis-3 definitions,
  which were published in 2016). Brief descriptions of all of these terms
  are provided in the following sections, but exam questions will most
  likely focus on sepsis and septic shock.
Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS)
  SIRS is a systemic inflammatory response to a wide variety of severe
  clinical insults, manifested by 2 or more of the following:
     Temperature ≥ 38°C or < 36°C
     Heart rate > 90 bpm
     Respiratory rate > 20 breaths/minute or PaCO2 < 32 mmHg
    WBC > 12,000 or < 4,000 or bands > 10% (shift to the left)
  A patient may have SIRS without sepsis (i.e., traumatic injury,
  pancreatitis, burns).
  Studies have shown that SIRS is a poor predictor of sepsis, and thus
  SIRS was eliminated from the Sepsis-3 definitions.
Sepsis
  Sepsis is a life-threatening organ dysfunction that is caused by an
  abnormal host response to an infection. Initially, the infection may be
  “suspected,” rather than “proven,” based on the clinical examination
  and the patient’s history.
  A “suspected” infection is the presence of one or more of the
  following:
     Positive culture results from blood, sputum, urine, etc.
     Receiving antibiotic, antifungal, or another anti-infective therapy
     Altered mental status in the elderly
     Possible pneumonia (infiltrate on the chest radiograph)
     Nursing home patient with an indwelling urinary catheter
     Pressure ulcers
     Acute abdomen
     Infected wounds, especially with a history of diabetes
     Immunosuppression
  Sepsis = infection + organ dysfunction
  Organ dysfunction may be identified by assessing the patient’s
  qSOFA score or SOFA score.


Examples of Organ Dysfunction
  Hypotension
  Acute hypoxemia
  Acute drop in urine output (< 0.5 mL/kg)
  Lactate 2 mmol/L or greater
  Abrupt mental status change
  Platelets below 100,000
  Coagulopathy
qSOFA (Quick Sepsis Related Organ Failure
Assessment) Score
  The qSOFA score is included in the Sepsis-3 definitions, but it is not
  currently included in the Adult CCRN test blueprint (although it could
  be added in the future).
  The qSOFA score is a bedside evaluation (without the need for labs)
  to identify patients with suspected organ dysfunction.
  The qSOFA score evaluates 3 criteria, assigning 1 point for each of
  the following:
     Systolic BP ≤ 100 mmHg
     Respiratory rate ≥ 22 breaths per minute
     Glasgow coma scale < 15 (altered mentation)
  A qSOFA score of 2 or 3 indicates a high probability for organ
  dysfunction.
Severe Sepsis
  Severe sepsis (as defined prior to the publication of the Sepsis-3
  definitions in 2016) is sepsis PLUS markers of organ dysfunction.
  Note that severe sepsis is not included in the Sepsis-3 definitions,
  and it has been eliminated from the Adult CCRN test blueprint.

 NOTE

 “Severe sepsis” is included in the Sepsis-2 definitions (from 2001) and is
 still used by the CMS, but it is not included in the Sepsis-3 definitions
 (from 2016) or in the current Adult CCRN test blueprint. The Sepsis-3
 definition of “sepsis” includes organ dysfunction, whereas the Sepsis-2
 definition instead calls it a “systemic response (SIRS positive) to an
 infection.” Due to changing nomenclature and “bundles” of care (1-hour, 3-
 hour, 6-hour) as defined by various organizations, it is unlikely that
 “severe sepsis” will be mentioned in an exam question. However, just in
 case you need a quick refresher on the differences between the Sepsis-2
 definitions and the Sepsis-3 definitions and how they define SIRS, sepsis,
 severe sepsis, and septic shock, refer to Table 5-3.



 Table 5-3. Differences Between the Sepsis-2 Definitions and the
                       Sepsis-3 Definitions
Septic Shock
  Of all deaths in hospitals annually, more than 40% are the result of
  septic shock.
  Clinically identified by an infection, PLUS:
    Vasopressor requirement to maintain a MAP of ≥ 65 mmHg,
    despite adequate fluid resuscitation
    Serum lactate > 2 mmol/L, despite fluid resuscitation
Differentiation of Infection, Sepsis, and Septic
Shock
Match the condition in the left-hand column with the clinical signs of
patients in the right-hand column, each of which has a documented
infection.


 A. Infection       1. _____ BP 78/36 before fluids, 102/58 after a 500 mL fluid
                    bolus, BE –5, pH 7.30, lactate 3 mmol/L, acute abdomen
 B. Sepsis          2. _____ BP 110/80, BE –1, pH 7.34, lactate 1.5 mmol/L,
                    temperature 39°C, WBC 15,000, acute abdomen
 C. Septic shock    3. _____ BP 78/40 before fluids, 88/49 after a 500 mL fluid
                    bolus × 4, BE –5, pH 7.31, lactate 6 mmol/L, acute abdomen



The answers are located at the end of the “Sepsis and Septic Shock”
section on page 124.
Pathophysiology of Sepsis/Septic Shock
  Sepsis/septic shock is a process of malignant intravascular
  inflammation.




        Figure 5-4. Pathophysiology of sepsis/septic shock

  Activation of coagulation, inflammatory cytokines, complement, and
  kinin cascades with the release of a variety of endogenous mediators
  Causative organisms include:
    Gram-negative bacteria
    Gram-positive bacteria
    Fungi, viruses, Rickettsia, parasites
Risk Factors for Sepsis
  Extremes of age
  Chronic health problems
  Invasive procedures and devices
  Surgical wounds
  Genitourinary infections
  Prolonged hospitalizations
  Translocation of GI bacteria (NPO)
  Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
  Use of cytotoxic and immunosuppressive agents
  Alcoholism
  Malignant neoplasms; bone marrow suppression
  Transplantation procedures
  History of a splenectomy
Signs/Symptoms of Early Septic Shock
  Tachycardia, bounding pulse
  BP is low, responsive to vasopressors
  Skin is warm, flushed
  Respirations are deep, somewhat fast
  Lactate > 2 mmol/L
  Confusion → mental status change (especially in elderly people)
  Oliguria
  Fever (temperature > 38°C)
Signs/Symptoms of Progressive (Later) Septic
Shock
   Hypotension, may not be responsive to pressors
   Tachycardia, pulse is weak and thready
   Lactate 4 mmol/L or greater
   Skin is cool, pale
   Respirations are rapid or may be slow
   Lethargy, coma
   Anuria
   Hypothermia (temperature < 36°C)

  MYTH

  A patient with sepsis or septic shock always has a fever and an elevated
  WBC.



Table 5-4 shows the hemodynamics of septic shock. Table 5-5 lists the
diagnostic test results that indicate septic shock.

             Table 5-4. Hemodynamics of Septic Shock*
Table 5-5. Diagnostic Test Results That Indicate Septic Shock*




Only 30–50% of patients who present with sepsis/septic shock have
positive blood cultures.
Treatment for Sepsis/Septic Shock
  MYTH

  A patient with sepsis or septic shock always has positive blood cultures.



  Initial fluid challenge should be the administration of 30 mL/kg of
  crystalloid (2.1 L for a 70 kg or 154 pound person) as early as
  possible to achieve the goals listed below:
    MAP ≥ 65 mmHg
     UO ≥ 0.5 mL/kg/hr
     Decrease in tachycardia
  If hypotension persists despite fluid resuscitation, start:
     Vasopressor: pressor of choice is norepinephrine.
   — Norepinephrine (Levophed) is first-line.
   — Epinephrine (drip) is recommended when a second
       vasopressor agent is needed.
  IF the BP does not respond to high-dose initial pressor and fluids, the
  patient may have catecholamine-refractory septic shock, whereby
  alpha receptors in the arterial bed are not responsive to pressors.
     Start a vasopressin drip at 0.03–0.04 units/min, generally not
     titrated.
   — NOT a first-line agent for hypotension
   — Used to enhance the effectiveness of the initial pressor that was
         used for treating septic shock
     If vasopressin is not effective, consider extreme metabolic acidosis
     or corticosteroid insufficiency related to a critical illness; treatment
     with sodium bicarbonate or steroids may be considered, although
     neither have demonstrated that they can improve mortality rates.
Obtain two blood cultures as early as possible that are drawn
simultaneously from two different sites prior to antibiotic
administration.
Begin broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy as early as possible after
recognizing sepsis/septic shock and after blood cultures are drawn;
administer within 3 hours of recognition of sepsis/septic shock
(preferably within 1 hour of recognition, if possible).
  In one study, for every hour that the administration of antibiotics
  was delayed, there was an approximately 12% decrease in the
 probability of survival.
Obtain serum lactate as early as possible and remeasure within 2–4
hours if the first lactate is > 2 mmol/L.
Identify the source of infection ASAP (which may direct antibiotic
and/or interventional therapy).
If the MAP remains below 65 mmHg OR the lactate is 4 mmol/L or
greater, reassess the fluid status.
  Ask a licensed independent practitioner to complete a focused
  clinical assessment, OR
  Perform an assessment of 2 of the following: measure the CVP;
  assess the patient’s fluid responsiveness with either a passive leg
  raise or a fluid challenge; perform/assess a bedside ECHO;
  measure the ScvO2.
Inotropic therapy—dobutamine is recommended (by itself or in
addition to a vasopressor) for patients with cardiac dysfunction, as
evidenced by high filling pressures and low cardiac output, or clinical
signs of hypoperfusion after successfully restoring the blood pressure
with effective volume resuscitation.
Oxygenation goals for septic shock
  Maintain SpO2 95% or greater
 Goal = ScvO2 ≥ 70% or SvO2 ≥ 65% (when CVP and MAP goals
 are met)
 If ScvO2 or SvO2 goals are not achieved:
— Consider further fluids
— Dobutamine infusion, max 20 mcg/kg/min
— Consider a transfusion of PRBCs if the Hgb is 7.0 or less
Summary of Therapeutic Endpoints for Septic Shock
  MAP ≥ 65 mmHg
  Decreased lactate/improved base deficit
  Normalization of heart rate
  UO ≥ 0.5 mL/kg/hr
  Warm extremities
  Mental status return to baseline
  Source control
  Central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2) ≥ 70% or SvO2 ≥ 65% (if
  CVP or PA line is available)
  CVP (if available), 8–12 mmHg
Differentiation of Infection, Sepsis, and Septic
Shock Answers


    A. Infection    1.      B   BP 78/36 before fluids, 102/58 after
                         a 500 mL fluid bolus, BE –5, pH 7.30, lactate
 B. Sepsis                         3 mmol/L, acute abdomen
                    2.      A      BP 110/80, BE –1, pH 7.34, lactate
  C. Septic shock        1.5 mmol/L, temperature 39°C, WBC 15,000,
                                       acute abdomen
                    3.     C    BP 78/40 before fluids, 88/49 after a
                           500 mL fluid bolus × 4, BE –5, pH 7.31,
                                lactate 6 mmol/L, acute abdomen
Anaphylactic Shock
 Anaphylaxis is an allergic reaction that is rapid in onset and may
 cause death.
 Usually occurs after previous exposure to the substance
 Hives, angioedema in ~ 88% of cases
 Respiratory tract involvement in ~ 50% of cases
 Shock occurs in ~ 30% of anaphylaxis cases.
Etiology
   IgE-mediated immediate hypersensitivity reaction to protein
   substances
     Penicillin, contrast media, bee sting, foods, latex
An anaphylactoid response looks the same clinically but is NOT IgE-
mediated. Previous exposure is not necessary (Figure 5-5).




      Figure 5-5. Pathophysiology of anaphylactic shock
Treatment
  Removal of offensive agent, if able
  O2
  0.3–0.5 mg of 1:1,000 epinephrine IM (more rapid absorption than
  subcutaneous) to decrease dilation, bronchospasm
  Aggressive fluid resuscitation (1–4 L) to treat the relative
  hypovolemia
  Antihistamine: diphenhydramine (Benadryl) 25–50 mg IV to
  decrease allergic response
  Inhaled beta-adrenergic agents to decrease bronchospasm
  Steroids IV (high-dose): peaks in 4–6 hours, give ASAP to get “on
  board” to decrease inflammatory response
Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome
(MODS)
 Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS), which is sometimes
 referred to as multi-organ dysfunction syndrome, is the progressive
 insufficiency of 2 or more organs in an acutely ill patient, such that
 homeostasis cannot be maintained without intervention (Table 5-6).

   Table 5-6. Markers of Multiple Organ Dysfunction Syndrome
                              (MODS)




 MODS may be the result of any type of shock.
  The greater the number of organs involved, the higher the mortality
  Accounts for ~ 80% of all ICU deaths annually
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment
(SOFA) Scoring System
 Unlike the bedside qSOFA evaluation, the SOFA utilizes lab
 results to assess the extent of a patient’s organ dysfunction. Six
 organ systems are evaluated, and each is assigned a score from
 0 to 4 based on results to obtain the total score:
   1. Hypotension (cardiovascular)
   2. Glasgow Coma Scale score (neurological)
  3. PaO2/FiO2 (pulmonary)
  4. Serum creatinine or urine output (renal)
  5. Bilirubin level (hepatic)
  6. Platelet count (hematologic)

 The total score may be useful for predicting the clinical outcome of
 critically ill patients. Studies have shown that mortality rates are
 associated with the SOFA score: the mortality rate is 50% if the
 score increases in the first 96 hours after admission; the mortality
 rate is 25% if the score remains the same in the first 96 hours
 after admission; and the mortality rate is less than 25% if the
 score decreases in the first 96 hours after admission.
Trauma
 Trauma is included in the Adult CCRN test blueprint. However,
 questions related to trauma are generally very straightforward.
 Make sure you know the trauma first-line assessment and
 second-line assessment.
Trauma First-Line Assessment (A, B, C, D, E)
  Airway: ensure a patent airway—consider intubation (stabilize the
  cervical spine if a spinal cord injury is suspected).
  Breathing: provide 100% oxygen and ventilation.
  Circulation: two large bore IVs with warm isotonic lactated
  Ringer’s
  Disability: perform a quick neurological exam—LOC, motor,
  pupils.
    Glasgow Coma Scale score is part of the neurological exam,
    not ALL of it.
  Expose/Environmental: remove the patient’s clothes, provide
  warmth/cooling as needed.
Trauma Second-Line Assessment (F, G, H, I)
  Full set of vital signs
    Focused adjuncts: ECG monitor, pulse oximeter, CO2 detector,
    urinary catheter, gastric tube, radiography, FAST, CT, DPL, labs
    Family presence
  Give comfort measures (pain management)
  History
  Inspect posterior: turn the patient over!
Providing Sedation to the Critically Ill
The Adult CCRN test blueprint has included treatment of pain and the
use of sedation agents in the multisystem section; management of
agitated behavior is also included in the behavioral/psychosocial section
of the blueprint.
Overview of Sedation
  A patient who is agitated (even a patient with a medical, rather than a
  surgical, diagnosis) should first receive an analgesic (analgesia-first
  sedation) before receiving anxiolytics. (Analgesic agents will be
  covered in the next section of this chapter after the following
  discussion of anxiolytics.)
  The degree of sedation (the sedation goal) should be based on the
  needs of the patient and should be agreed upon by and
  communicated to all members of the health care team. This sedation
  goal applies to the sedation provided during a procedure and to the
  sedation provided as part of the therapeutic plan of care.
  Maintaining light levels of sedation in adult ICU patients is
  associated with improved clinical outcomes (i.e., a shorter duration of
  mechanical ventilation and a shorter ICU length of stay).
  When sedation is provided on an as-needed, PRN basis, there is less
  of a possibility of oversedation than there is when sedation is
  provided with a continuous infusion.
  Daily interruptions of continuous infusions of sedation agents allows
  for an assessment of further need for the sedation agent and a
  neurological assessment of the patient.
  Nonpharmacological treatment (massage, music, cold therapy, and
  relaxation techniques) should be considered before using an
  anxiolytic agent, especially for mild anxiety and agitation.
  The levels of sedation are:
     Minimal (Light) Sedation: The patient responds normally to verbal
     commands.
     Moderate Sedation: The patient responds purposefully to verbal
     commands, either alone or accompanied by light tactile stimulation.
  The patient is able to maintain a patent airway.
  Deep Sedation: The patient cannot be easily aroused but
  responds purposefully to repeated or painful stimulation. The
  patient may require assistance in maintaining a patent airway.
  Deep sedation is generally only used during a procedure by
  providers with specialized privileges or is ongoing for a patient
  receiving mechanical ventilation.
  General Anesthesia: This is a loss of consciousness during which
  patients are not arousable, even by painful stimulation.
The level of sedation may exceed the level intended; therefore, the
RN needs to be able to identify when this occurs and act accordingly.
Assessment of Agitation and Sedation
  Rule out hypoxemia, hemodynamic instability, and pain as causes of
  agitation. If any of these is present, treat accordingly.
  Assess for additional etiologies (Table 5-7).

        Table 5-7. Causes of Agitation in Critically Ill Patients




  Use a valid and reliable sedation assessment tool for measuring the
  quality and depth of sedation before and after treatment.
    The Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS) and the Sedation-
    Agitation Scale (SAS) are valid and reliable sedation assessment
    tools that are used for adult critical care patients.
Treatment with Select Sedation Agents
  See Table 5-8 for select sedation agents that are commonly used for
  an acute/critically ill patient. The dose that is given may vary
  depending upon unit protocols.

        Table 5-8. Dosing and Nursing Implications for Select
                          Sedation Agents
✰ Note that memorization of exact dosing is not generally needed for this
  exam. You need to understand how to manage a patient who requires
  types of sedation: intermittent, continuous, and procedural (minimal
  and moderate).
Benzodiazepine Reversal with Flumazenil (Romazicon)

   Reverse the effects of benzodiazepines with flumazenil (Romazicon)
   0.2 mg IV over 15 seconds for moderate sedation/over 30 seconds
   for overdosage.
   Repeat doses, 0.2 mg at 1-minute intervals, maximum of 4 doses,
   until patient awakens.
   For resedation, give repeat doses at 20-minute intervals as needed,
   0.2 mg per minute to a maximum of 1 mg total, and 3 mg total in 1
   hour.
   Onset of action of flumazenil is 1–2 minutes, 30% response within 3
   minutes, peak effect in 6–10 minutes.
   Resedation occurs after approximately 1 hour; the duration of
   flumazenil is related to the dose given and the benzodiazepine
   plasma concentrations.
✰ Note that the reversal effects of flumazenil may wear off before the
  effects of the benzodiazepine. Therefore, monitor for a return of
  sedation and respiratory depression for at least 2 hours and until the
  patient is stable and resedation is unlikely.
   Use with caution for those with a history of prolonged use. A seizure
   may occur with reversal.
Daily Sedation Withdrawal (Spontaneous Awakening
Trial)
An evidence-based strategy for preventing oversedation and its
complications is to withhold the sedation for patients who are receiving a
continuous drip in order to perform a neurological assessment and
determine whether the continuous sedation drip is still clinically
beneficial. The daily spontaneous awakening trial (SAT), or sedation
vacation, is best done in conjunction with the daily spontaneous
breathing trial (SBT). Suggested guidelines for performing the daily SAT
are as follows:

 1. Screen the patient prior to the spontaneous awakening trial.
       No myocardial ischemia
       No active seizures
       No alcohol withdrawal
       No paralytic drip
       Stable intracranial pressure
       No recent increase in the sedation drip dose to maintain the goal
       RASS score
 2. Turn off the sedation drip.
       If the sedation agent is propofol, consider weaning down every 5
       minutes to prevent sudden agitation.
 3. Monitor the patient for awakening and tolerance to drug withdrawal.
      Assess the patient’s neurological status, discomfort, and pain.
      Assess the level of sedation/agitation with a sedation tool.
      Signs of SAT failure include:
         Dangerous agitation
         Sustained tachypnea, increased work of breathing
         Sustained drop in SpO2 to < 90%
         Acute arrhythmia
         Hypotension
4. Determine whether the sedation drip should be discontinued and
   replaced with PRN dosing, restarted at half the dose, or returned to
   the pre-SAT dose.
Providing Analgesia to the Acutely
and Critically Ill
Overview of Pain
  Pain has adverse physiological and psychological effects,
  including activation of the physiological stress response,
  depression, and delirium.
  Etiologies of pain in the acutely and critically ill include the obvious
  sources and the not-so-obvious sources (Table 5-9).

Table 5-9. Causes of Pain/Discomfort in an Acutely or Critically
                           Ill Patient
Pain Assessment
  It is recommended that pain be routinely assessed in all adult ICU
  patients.
  Attempt to obtain the patient’s self-report of pain using the
  Numerical Rating Scale (NRS), pointing, and head nodding.
  The Behavioral Pain Scale (BPS) is recommended for a patient
  who is receiving mechanical ventilation and is unable to self-report
  pain. The Critical-Care Pain Observation Tool (CPOT) is
  recommended for assessing the pain of a patient who is unable to
  self-report pain, with or without mechanical ventilation.
  Vital signs alone should not be used for pain assessment in
  critically ill adults, but they can be used as a cue to assess pain
  further.
  Consider asking a family member or friend who knows the patient
  well (a proxy reporter) whether the patient’s behavior may indicate
  the presence of pain.
Pain Management
  Intravenous (IV) opioids are the first-line choice to treat non-
  neuropathic pain in critically ill patients. All available IV opioids,
  when titrated to similar pain intensity endpoints, are equally
  effective (Table 5-10). The dose that is given may vary
  depending upon unit protocols.
  Prevent pain as you are able to by using:
    Preemptive analgesia prior to procedures that are likely to
    cause pain
    Nonpharmacological interventions (distraction, relaxation
    therapy)
  If the patient is agitated, treat pain first and then sedate.

    Table 5-10. Pharmacology of Select Opioid Analgesics
Opioid Reversal with Naloxone
  Give 0.4 to 2 mg IV every 2 minutes until effect to a maximum of
  10 mg.
  Duration of naloxone action is 1 to 2 hours; repeated doses may
  be needed for a long-acting opioid.
Targeted Temperature Management
(TTM)
Overview
   Targeted Temperature Management (TTM) is a treatment that lowers
   the patient’s core body temperature in order to prevent the
   neurological effects of an ischemic injury in the brain of survivors of
   sudden cardiac death.
   Assess patients after cardiac arrest for inclusion criteria and
   exclusion criteria (Table 5-11).

    Table 5-11. Inclusion Criteria and Exclusion Criteria for the Use
                  of Targeted Temperature Management




This therapy involves 3 phases:

 1. Induction phase: lower the patient’s temperature to 32–36°C (as
    ordered by the provider); start this cooling ASAP.
       The RN should initiate this cooling within 90 minutes of the
       patient going into arrest; the cooling may last for as long as 6
     hours after the arrest.
2. Maintenance phase: keep the patient at the target temperature (32–
   36°C) for 24 hours.
3. Rewarming phase: slowly increase the patient’s temperature to
   36.5–37°C (as ordered by the provider).
Induction Phase
  Set the goal time to the target temperature.
  Monitor the core temperature (pulmonary artery catheter, esophageal,
  bladder, rectal)..
  Apply the device (external pads or internal central venous catheter).
  The goal systolic BP is generally > 90 mmHg, and the goal MAP is
  generally > 70 mmHg.
  Obtain baseline labs and generally complete a metabolic panel, a
  complete blood count, a coagulation panel, a check of the patient’s
  serum magnesium and phosphorus levels, and an arterial blood gas.
  Get a baseline bedside blood glucose measurement.
  Obtain a 12-lead ECG.
  Initiate deep sedation.
  Manage shivering by covering the head, hands, and feet or by using
  meperidine (Demerol); use a neuromuscular agent if shivering is not
  controlled with meperidine (Demerol).
  Monitor/manage the systemic effects of hypothermia.


Systemic Effects of Hypothermia
  Insulin resistance → hyperglycemia
  Electrolyte and fluid shifts
  Shivering
  Skin breakdown
  Pupil and corneal reflexes may be absent due to hypothermia
  Decreased cardiac output
    Up to 25%
  Alteration in coagulation
    Platelet dysfunction
Increased risk for infection
  Neutrophil and macrophage functions decrease at temperatures
  less than 35°C.
Maintenance Phase (Duration 24 Hours)
  Continuously monitor the core temperature (bladder, rectal); the core
  temperature should not be lower than the specified goal (32–36°C).
  Monitor vital signs (at least hourly).
  Obtain routine bedside blood glucose measurements and initiate an
  insulin drip as needed.
  Monitor train-of-four (TOF) every hour if a paralytic is used and
  ensure a goal of 1–2 twitches to prevent prolonged paralysis.
  Repeat labs (same as baseline labs) every 8 hours until the patient is
  rewarmed.
Rewarming Phase
  Perform passive rewarming to 36.5–37°C.
  Program the cooling unit to increase the target temperature by 1
  degree per hour.
  Stop all potassium administration 8 hours prior to rewarming.
    Rewarming causes rebound hyperkalemia.
  Discontinue paralytics (if they were being used) after the patient is
  warmed to 36.5°C.
  Repeat labs (same as baseline) when the patient is rewarmed.
  Perform a close neurological assessment; pupil and corneal reflexes
  may continue to be absent for a time.
Toxin/Drug Exposure
The Adult CCRN exam may include 1 question related to toxin/drug
exposure.
General Points
  Toxin/drug exposure may be accidental or intentional.
  ✰ Initial management—always assess ABCs (airway, breathing,
    circulation).

  If the patient is comatose, be prepared to give 50% dextrose 50 mL,
  thiamine 50–100 mg, naloxone 2 mg IV.
  To prevent absorption of the toxin/drug, give activated charcoal 1
  gm/kg via gastric lavage.
      Contraindicated with hydrocarbon or corrosive ingestions
      Not necessary for the ingestion of iron, lithium, or alcohols
  Facilitate the removal of the drug—urine alkalization, hemodialysis.
  Administer an antidote, if indicated (e.g., naloxone).
  Monitor for arrhythmias.
  Monitor the urine output.
  If there is a chemical exposure, give an antidote (if possible),
  remove the chemical (if it is a powder, brush it away; if it is a liquid,
  flush it with saline or water), do not rub the affected area, and cover
  the affected area with a sterile damp dressing.
Management of Toxin/Drug Exposure
  See Table 5-12 for the management of specific toxin/drug exposure.

   Table 5-12. Signs, Symptoms, and Treatment of Specific Toxic
                             Agents
Healthcare-Associated Infections
(HAIs)
Healthcare-associated infections (HAIs), also known as healthcare-
associated conditions, were recently added to the Adult CCRN test
blueprint. Be prepared to understand the role of the nurse in the
prevention of these infections, which are considered indicators of the
quality of care that is provided to patients. In general, an infection
that develops more than 48 hours after admission to the hospital is
considered healthcare-associated; if the infection is identified within
48 hours after admission to the hospital, it is considered community-
acquired. Hospitals are now required to report cases of HAIs to
government agencies, and some cases are publicly reported.

Guidelines for the prevention of ventilator-associated pneumonia
(VAP), central line-associated bloodstream infections (CLABSIs),
and catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs) have been
provided by several national organizations, including the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Society for Healthcare
Epidemiology of America (SHEA), the Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA), and the Association for Professionals in Infection
Control and Epidemiology (APIC). “Care bundles” are sets of
evidence-based practices that lead to improved outcomes if all
elements are completed.
Ventilator-Associated Event (VAE)
  VAEs are complications that may occur as a result of mechanical
  ventilation. Complications include pneumonia, barotrauma,
  ARDS, atelectasis, and/or fluid overload.
  VAE is a term that was created by the CDC to better describe an
  occurrence of ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP). VAP is a
  type of VAE. For the Adult CCRN exam, you will be expected to
  understand VAP and strategies to prevent VAP; you will not be
  expected to understand the complex VAE algorithm.
  Refer to page 90 of the Respiratory Concepts chapter of this
  book for a review of the ways to prevent VAP.
Central Line-Associated Bloodstream Infection
(CLABSI)
A central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI) is a
laboratory-confirmed bloodstream infection that develops within 48
hours of a central line placement and is not related to an infection at
any other sites. A CLABSI results in longer hospital stays, increased
costs, and an increased risk of death. CLABSI mortality rates of 12%
to 25% have been reported.

The guidelines for the prevention of CLABSIs are as follows:

  Develop standardized, evidence-based policies/procedures with
  indications for central line use, insertion, and maintenance.
  Insertion
    Ensure that processes are in place for insertion according to the
    guidelines (e.g., central line cart, checklists).
    Optimize site selection (subclavian vein) as able; avoid femoral
    or internal jugular site if at all possible.
    Ensure that the team utilizes aseptic technique during insertion.
    Utilize maximal barrier precautions and personal protective
    equipment during insertion.
    Prepare the skin using chlorhexidine skin antisepsis.
    Use chlorhexidine patch/gel dressing over the insertion site
    (unless there is an allergy).
  Maintenance
    Practice hand hygiene prior to line manipulation/care.
  Provide a head-to-toe chlorhexidine bath daily for ICU patients.
  Disinfect catheter hubs, needleless connectors, and injection
  ports with mechanical friction for no less than 5 seconds with an
  antiseptic before accessing the catheter.
  Ensure the patency of the dressing, and change the dressing
  and tubing according to hospital policy.
  Do not routinely replace central lines (e.g., every 72 hours)
  unless it is known that the insertion was performed emergently
  without antisepsis.
  Discontinue a central line if there are signs of an infection.
  Perform a daily review of line necessity.
  Use aseptic technique for dressing changes, ensuring dressing
  patency at all times.
  Ensure that there is an appropriate nurse-to-patient ratio and
  limit the use of float nurses in ICUs.
Monitoring
  Perform root cause analyses on line infections and develop
  action plans for improvement accordingly.
  Develop processes for measuring compliance with
  policies/procedures.
  Share quality monitoring and infection results with the staff.
  Assess competency of the staff who insert/care for lines.
Require that all health care personnel, who are involved in the
insertion, care, and maintenance of central venous catheters
(CVCs), be educated about CLABSI prevention.
Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infection
(CAUTI)
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) defines a
catheter-associated urinary tract infection (CAUTI) as an infection of
the urinary tract, where an indwelling urinary catheter was in place
for more than 2 consecutive days in an inpatient location on the date
of event, with day of device placement being Day 1 AND an
indwelling urinary catheter in place on the date of event or the day
before.

The guidelines for the prevention of CAUTIs are as follows:

  Develop standardized, evidence-based policies/procedures with
  criteria for catheter use.
  Utilization practices
     Avoid inserting an indwelling urinary catheter, if at all possible.
     Develop standardized, evidence-based reasons for insertion
     such as select operative procedures, acute urinary retention or
     bladder outlet obstruction, gross hematuria, a need for an
     accurate measurement of urine output, to assist in the healing
     of open sacral or perineal wounds in incontinent patients, or for
     patients who require prolonged immobilization (e.g., potentially
     unstable thoracic or lumbar spine, multiple traumatic injuries
     such as pelvic fractures).
     Perform a daily review of catheter need based on agreed upon
     hospital standardized criteria.
  Remove catheters as soon as they are no longer necessary; as
  per the CDC, when a catheter is placed during surgery and
  remains in place post-op, remove the catheter as soon as
  possible, preferably within 24 hours, unless there are
  appropriate indications for continued use.
  Implement a nurse-driven protocol to empower nurses to
  evaluate and discontinue unnecessary urinary catheters.
  Utilize alternative strategies (external catheters, intermittent
  straight catheterization as able).
Insertion and maintenance practices
  Use aseptic technique during insertion
  Make insertion a 2-person activity to reduce breaks in aseptic
  technique during insertion.
  Practice hand hygiene prior to/following catheter
  manipulation/care.
  Utilize standard precautions, including the use of gloves and
  gowns, as appropriate.
  Employ routine catheter care, cleansing the meatal area
  (antiseptic solution is not needed); replace basin bathing with
  plain wipes.
  Maintain an unobstructed urine flow (e.g., ensure proper
  securement of the catheter, maintain tubing free of kinks or
  dependent loops, maintain the collection bag below the level of
  the bladder).
  Do not disconnect/reconnect system components.
  Collect urine samples from the sampling port using aseptic
  technique.
Process measures
Assess the competency of the clinicians who insert catheters;
provide periodic training and competency assessments.
Identify unit “CAUTI champions,” whose role is to monitor
patients with indwelling urinary catheters and ensure that
standards for infection prevention are utilized by caregivers.
Develop quality measures and share outcomes with the staff.
Perform a root cause analysis for each infection and implement
action plans based on those analyses.
Multi-Drug Resistant Organisms (MDROs)
 Patients who are vulnerable to colonization and an infection with
 MDROs include the critically ill, especially those with
 compromised host defenses from underlying medical conditions,
 recent surgery, or the presence of indwelling medical devices
 (e.g., urinary catheters, central lines).
 The following are the most common organisms that are found in
 hospitals, long-term care facilities, and at times, in the
 community:
   Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
   Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE)
   Clostridium difficile (C. diff)
   Carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae (CRE)
 The following strategies are used to prevent infections caused by
 multi-drug resistant organisms (MDROs):
   Establish a culture where hand hygiene is expected of all
   caregivers.
   Develop an antibiotic stewardship and an antibiotic de-
   escalation program.
   Provide universal decolonization of ICU patients through
   chlorhexidine bathing and nasal decolonization.
   Focus on the rapid identification of MDROs and the
   development of a strong containment program.
   Utilize team rounding/huddles to ensure that
   VAP/CLABSI/CAUTI evidence-based interventions (bundles)
   are followed and that antibiotic stewardship is practiced.
Conduct a root cause analysis of infections that occur.
Develop a process to assess that clinicians utilize contact
precautions according to hospital policy.
Develop processes for reliable cleaning of equipment and
surfaces.
Provide education regarding hand hygiene and when soap and
water (rather than hand gel) is required: following contact with
patients with C. difficile, when the clinician’s hands are visibly
soiled, after the clinician has used the restroom, and before the
clinician eats.
Palliative Care, Hospice Care, and
End-of-Life Care
Palliative Care
 Palliative care is the prevention and treatment of the symptoms
 and side effects of a serious illness. Physiological, emotional,
 social, and spiritual problems are considered.
   Palliative care can be initiated anytime during a disease or life-
   threatening illness.
   This type of care has been found to be most beneficial when it
   is initiated early.
   Symptom management may include the management of pain,
   anxiety, dyspnea, urticaria, nausea/vomiting, constipation, and
   diarrhea, among other symptoms.
 Aggressive treatment may be continued.
 All critically ill patients deserve palliative care.
 Palliative care has been shown to improve survival, decrease
 resource utilization, and decrease hospital readmissions and the
 cost of care.
Hospice Care
 Hospice care is the provision of symptom management for those
 with a terminal illness. It includes palliative care, but disease-
 modifying treatments are discontinued unless they may provide
 symptom management.
 Grief and bereavement services are included.
End-of-Life Care
 End-of-Life (EOL) care supports the needs of patients and their
 families at the time of imminent death. It is always a part of
 hospice care, and it may or may not be a part of palliative care. It
 is provided to all patients who are at the end of their lives,
 regardless of whether or not palliative care or hospice care were
 initiated.
    EOL care avoids prolongation of the dying process.
    EOL care provides support to the patient’s family.
Similarities Between Palliative Care, Hospice
Care, and End-of-Life Care
All three of these types of care involve:

  Advance care planning
  Focusing on patient/family wishes
  Optimizing quality of life


 Now that you have reviewed the key multisystem concepts, go to
 the Practice Questions. Answer the questions, and then check
 your answers. Continue to review the information until you answer
 80% of the practice questions correctly.
Practice Questions
 1. Which medications are most often prescribed for anaphylaxis
    after initial therapy with IM epinephrine?

    (A) antihistamines and corticosteroids
    (B) vasopressors and inotropes
    (C) antihistamines and antibiotics
    (D) corticosteroids and vasopressors


 2. Which of the following would most likely result in an SvO2 of
   82%?

    (A) hypovolemic shock
    (B) anaphylactic shock
    (C) septic shock
    (D) cardiogenic shock

 3. The initial management of any drug intoxication is to:

    (A) prevent further absorption of the drug.
    (B) increase excretion of the drug.
    (C) administer an antidote when appropriate.
    (D) ensure a patent airway and adequate breathing.

 4. A patient is being treated for sepsis with fluid resuscitation, but
    the MAP is 55 mmHg and norepinephrine is ordered. What
  primary beneficial effect will norepinephrine provide for this
  patient?

   (A) It will maintain renal blood flow.
   (B) It will increase coronary artery blood flow.
   (C) It will increase venous return and preload.
   (D) It will restore vascular tone and afterload.

5. Which of the following would be an indicator that fluid
   resuscitation is adequate?

   (A) The CVP is 2 mmHg.
   (B) The heart rate is decreasing.
   (C) The pulse pressure is narrowing.
   (D) The serum lactate is 4.1 mmol/L.

6. Which of the following is TRUE in regard to shock?

   (A) The MAP is adequate in the compensatory phase of shock.
   (B) The blood pressure is maintained in Class III hemorrhagic
       shock.
   (C) An elevated lactate level occurs late in septic shock.
   (D) Serum bicarbonate is elevated in shock.

7. A patient with upper GI bleeding received procedural sedation
   with midazolam during his endoscopy procedure. He required
   higher doses to maintain sedation and screened positive for
   obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Which of the following is TRUE
   regarding this patient’s plan of care?
   (A) Respiratory depression will generally precede sedation.
   (B) Pulse oximetry will detect early hypoventilation.
   (C) Waveform capnography monitoring is indicated for this
       patient post-procedure.
   (D) The maximum dose of flumazenil (Romazicon) for
       midazolam reversal is 0.2 mg IV.

8. A patient is receiving a continuous sedation infusion of propofol
   (Diprivan) at 30 mcg/kg/min. Which of the following is an
   appropriate intervention for this patient?

   (A) Reverse the side effects with flumazenil (Romazicon).
   (B) Provide a daily spontaneous awakening trial.
   (C) Avoid administering analgesia.
   (D) Monitor the patient closely for hypertension.

9. Which of the following statements is TRUE in relation to the
   treatment of sepsis?

   (A) Special protocols, “bundles” of interventions, are indicated
       for the presence of an infection with evidence of organ
       dysfunction.
   (B) Administering pressors is required for treating sepsis.
   (C) By definition, a patient with systemic inflammatory
       response syndrome (SIRS) has an infection.
   (D) Positive cultures are required in order to make the
       diagnosis of septic shock.
10. Which of the following statements regarding targeted
    temperature management (TTM) is CORRECT?

    (A) TTM should be provided for all patients status post
        ventricular fibrillation.
    (B) Potassium infusions will most likely be required during
        rewarming.
    (C) Shivering is expected and is generally self-limiting.
    (D) Insulin infusions are often required during the maintenance
        phase.

11. A patient who has sustained traumatic injuries, including a
    pelvic fracture and soft tissue injuries, has required a
    transfusion of 7 units of packed red blood cells (PRBCs).
    Which of the following is TRUE related to the care of this
    patient?

    (A) Pressors will most likely be required.
    (B) The patient will need to be monitored for hypercalcemia.
    (C) Blood products and crystalloids should be warmed.
    (D) Platelets will need to be given if the platelet count drops.

12. A patient is receiving mechanical ventilation and is able to write
    notes to communicate. Which of the following is the most
    appropriate intervention related to the management of pain for
    this patient?
    (A) Coach the patient in the use of self-reporting with the
         numerical rating scale (NRS).
    (B) Initiate pain medication during procedures when the patient
         first demonstrates pain behaviors.
    (C) Disregard the use of nonpharmacological interventions for
         pain since the patient is receiving mechanical ventilation.
    (D) Ensure that the mean arterial pressure (MAP) is greater
         than 60 mmHg before providing intravenous opiates.

13. A 38-year-old female patient was admitted with multiple
    traumatic injuries, including flail chest, a ruptured spleen, and a
    crush injury to her left leg. She is receiving mechanical
    ventilation. The nurse considers requesting a palliative care
    consult, knowing that the benefits of palliative care include all
    of the following EXCEPT:

    (A) improved survival.
    (B) symptom management.
    (C) improved quality of care.
    (D) increased cost of care.

14. It is usually important to decrease the number of days that a
    patient has an indwelling urinary catheter in place. Which of the
    following statements presents a valid reason for maintaining
    this type of catheter?
    (A) The patient is receiving mechanical ventilation.
    (B) The catheter was inserted yesterday during renal surgery.
    (C) It is painful for the patient to use the bedpan.
    (D) The patient is receiving medications that may cause urine
        retention.

15. A patient requires the insertion of a chest tube, and the
    physician plans for moderate sedation with fentanyl. During the
    procedure, the RN notices that the patient only responds to
    repeated vigorous shaking. Which of the following choices
    provides an accurate assessment of this situation and
    describes the proper intervention that is indicated?

    (A) A patient assessment reveals a level of general
        anesthesia; the proper intervention is to call the
        anesthesiologist for intubation.
    (B) A patient assessment reveals a level of moderate sedation;
        the proper intervention is to ask for a flumazenil
        (Romazicon) order.
    (C) A patient assessment reveals a level of deep sedation; the
        proper intervention is to assess the patient’s
        oxygenation/ventilation.
    (D) The proper interventions are to alert the physician to the
        level of sedation and to begin assisting the patient’s
        ventilation with a bag/mask.

16. Which of the following is TRUE for a patient who has SIRS
    (meaning that the patient has 2 or more of the 4 criteria) or has
   a positive qSOFA score (meaning that the patient has 2 or 3 of
   the criteria)?

    (A) An assessment of the qSOFA score requires laboratory
        testing.
    (B) Both SIRS and the qSOFA score are markers of an
        infection.
    (C) SIRS is a component of the Sepsis-3 definitions, and the
        qSOFA score is a component of the Sepsis-2 definitions.
    (D) SIRS is a marker of inflammation, and the qSOFA score is
        a marker of organ dysfunction.

17. Within the past 2 weeks, 3 patients developed VRE in 1 critical
    care unit. Which of the following strategies has been
    demonstrated to be effective in the prevention of additional
    cases of VRE?

    (A) Perform a root cause analysis of the 3 known
        cases of VRE.
    (B) Screen all newly admitted patients for VRE.
    (C) Administer vancomycin prophylactically to all patients
        within the unit.
    (D) Tape posters about hand washing on the doors of all
        patient rooms.

18. A patient is being treated for a confirmed salicylate overdose.
    Which of the following interventions should the nurse
    anticipate?
    (A) Closely monitor for respiratory depression.
    (B) Prepare for hemodialysis.
    (C) Administer thiamine 100 mg IV.
    (D) Administer all doses of N-acetylcysteine, regardless of
        subsequent salicylate levels.

19. If a patient’s death appears imminent, which of the following
    should be the focus of care for the health care team?

    (A) a palliative care consult
    (B) hospice placement
    (C) completion of an advance directive
    (D) supporting the patient/the patient’s family

20. A patient is being treated for septic shock. Four hours after the
    identification of sepsis, the serum lactate is 5.2 mmol/L. Based
    on this information, which of the following steps is indicated?

    (A) Perform a passive leg raise.
    (B) Initiate vasopressin.
    (C) Reevaluate the choice of antibiotic.
    (D) Increase FiO2.


21. Which of the following strategies is used to reduce central line-
    associated bloodstream infections (CLABSIs)?
(A) Avoid the subclavian insertion site.
(B) Ensure that the patient’s chest is covered with sterile
    towels during insertion of the central line.
(C) If possible, avoid frequent blood draws from the central
    line.
(D) Always wash your hands with soap and water before
    entering the room.
Answer Key
 1. A
 2. C
 3. D
 4. D
 5. B
 6. A
 7. C
 8. B
 9. A
10. D
11. C
12. A
13. D
14. B
15. C
16. D
17. A
18. B
19. D
20. A
21. C
Answers and Explanations
 1. (A) An antihistamine will help halt the allergic response, and a
    corticosteroid will help halt the inflammatory response.
    Vasopressors, inotropes, and antibiotics are not helpful for
    anaphylactic shock.
 2. (C) The normal SvO2 is 60% to 75%. In septic shock, oxygen
   delivery (DO2) is adequate, but oxygen utilization (VO2) at the
   cellular level is low. A sign of poor oxygen utilization when
   oxygen delivery is adequate is an elevated SvO2. Oxygen is not
   being used, despite its availability, and blood is returning to the
   pulmonary artery with more oxygen than expected. The other 3
   types of shock result in poor oxygen delivery, which causes low
   oxygen utilization with a low SvO2. In summary, poor oxygen
   utilization may result in a low SvO2 when delivery of oxygen is
   low and an elevated SvO2 when the oxygen delivery is
    adequate or high.
 3. (D) If the intoxication affects the patient’s airway and breathing,
    the other 3 interventions listed will be of no use since the
    patient will not survive.
 4. (D) The problem in sepsis/septic shock is massive dilation (low
    SVR) and capillary leak (resulting in relative hypovolemia). If
    needed, pressors (such as norepinephrine) cause
    vasoconstriction and increase SVR (afterload). Although
    pressors may also increase preload and renal blood flow, these
    are secondary effects. The primary effect of pressors is the
   restoration of afterload. Although septic shock may result in
   ventricular damage with resultant elevated troponin, myocardial
   damage is not due to a drop in coronary artery blood flow;
   rather, the damage is due to the effects that endotoxins have on
   cardiac muscles.
5. (B) As vascular volume is restored and preload is increased,
   there is less need for compensatory mechanisms (an increase
   in heart rate). A CVP of 2 mmHg, narrowing of the pulse
   pressure, and an elevated lactate (anaerobic metabolism) are
   all signs that filling pressures have not been optimized.
6. (A) Since compensatory mechanisms are working, the MAP is
   maintained in the compensatory phase. If these mechanisms
   fail, the MAP drops and hypotension results (progressive
   phase). In Class III hemorrhagic shock, the blood pressure
   decreases and is no longer maintained. In septic shock, lactate
   rises early on during sepsis, not later on. Serum bicarbonate is
   decreased (not elevated) in shock due to lactic acidosis.
7. (C) Waveform capnography is indicated during and after
   procedural sedation in order to identify EARLY hypoventilation.
   Longer monitoring may be required for a patient with a history
   of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Sedation usually precedes
   respiratory depression. SpO2 will not decrease until the PaCO2
   is very high. Flumazenil reverses benzodiazepines. However,
   resedation may occur, and subsequent doses of flumazenil may
   be necessary.
8. (B) Studies have shown improved patient outcomes, shorter
   ventilator times, and less risk of oversedation when “awakening
   trials” are done for a patient who is on a continuous sedation
    infusion. Propofol is not reversed with flumazenil. Analgesia
    should be used for agitation, not avoided. Propofol is more
    likely to cause hypotension, not hypertension.
 9. (A) “Sepsis bundles” are indicated for the presence of an
    infection with signs of organ dysfunction, since these cases
    result in increased mortality. Sepsis, by definition, does not
    require pressor administration. SIRS may be present without an
    infection (e.g., trauma, pancreatitis). In addition, only 30–50% of
    patients with sepsis/septic shock present with positive cultures.
10. (D) Targeted temperature management (TTM) may result in
    hyperglycemia, which will necessitate insulin infusions to
    maintain normoglycemia during the maintenance phase of TTM.
    Targeted temperature management is only indicated for an
    unresponsive patient s/p cardiac arrest, not for ALL patients.
    Potassium is required during the maintenance phase of TTM to
    correct hypokalemia. However, during rewarming, potassium
    replacement needs to be stopped. Shivering will prevent
    temperature reduction, is not self-limiting, and will need to be
    treated with either meperidine or neuromuscular blocking
    agents.
11. (C) It is important to prevent hypothermia and its resultant
    adverse consequences during fluid/transfusion resuscitation.
    Therefore, fluids and blood products need to be warmed.
    Pressors are not indicated in hypovolemic shock since the
    afterload in hypovolemic shock is already abnormally high due
    to compensation for volume loss. The problem needs to be
    addressed by “filling up the tank” to restore circulation volume.
    HYPOCALCEMIA (not hypercalcemia) secondary to calcium
    binding to citrate in stored blood is a potential problem related
    to the transfusion of PRBCs. Platelets are not in PRBCs and
    should be replaced regardless of platelet count when a large
    volume of PRBCs is administered. Replacing platelets will
    prevent thrombocytopenia and coagulation problems.
12. (A) Self-reporting pain is always preferred. In the scenario
    described, the patient is capable of providing a pain intensity
    number. Preemptive analgesia is preferred for procedures that
    are likely to be painful rather than waiting until pain is
    experienced. Nonpharmacological interventions are always
    appropriate. Hypotensive patients still require pain
    management. Pain should not be used to “keep up the BP.” An
    opiate (such as fentanyl) may be used because it is less likely
    to cause a further drop in blood pressure, and the hypotension
    can be treated as needed.
13. (D) Palliative care consults have been shown to decrease, not
    increase, the cost of care, especially when they occur early
    during a hospital stay. Choices (A), (B), and (C) ARE benefits of
    palliative care consults.
14. (B) A patient who is only 1 day post-op renal surgery needs an
    indwelling catheter until the surgeon has determined that the
    patient’s condition would not be adversely impacted by
    removing the catheter. Mechanical ventilation (choice (A)) itself
    is not a criterion for an indwelling urinary catheter; the need for
    an indwelling urinary catheter should be based on further
    assessments for one of the CDC criteria for catheter use. Pain
    with mobility (as described in choice (C)) could be controlled,
    and the risks associated with a Foley catheter outweigh patient
    discomfort, which can be managed. If the patient is receiving
    medications that may lead to acute urine retention (choice (D)),
    the patient should be monitored for urine retention. Even if that
    does occur, the patient may be a candidate for intermittent
    straight catheterization, or the medications may be able to be
    changed to alternative agents.
15. (C) The need for vigorous shaking in order to elicit a response
    is evidence of deep sedation, and the first priority is for the
    nurse to ensure that the patient has adequate ventilation and
    oxygenation. This patient is not evidencing general anesthesia
    (choice (A)), and intubation is most likely not going to be
    needed since a reversal agent could be given and the patient’s
    ventilation could be temporarily assisted. The patient
    assessment would not reveal moderate sedation (choice (B)),
    and flumazenil is not the reversal agent for fentanyl. Naloxone
    (Narcan) is the reversal agent for the opioid fentanyl. This
    scenario does not describe the signs of inadequate
    ventilation that require immediate assistance (choice (D)),
    although the physician does need to be alerted to the level of
    sedation.
16. (D) SIRS is a marker of inflammation and is not necessarily
    associated with organ dysfunction or an infection. The qSOFA
    score is a marker of organ dysfunction. The remaining choices
    are not true.
17. (A) It is important to understand the reason for MDRO
    infections in order to look for patterns and to correct gaps in
    infection control so as to prevent future infections. A root cause
    analysis, led by quality improvement staff, often provides the
    answers in terms of the cause of these infections. The
    remaining 3 strategies have not been demonstrated to prevent
    the development of MDROs. Screening for VRE (choice (B))
    has not been demonstrated to be successful, nor is it cost-
    effective. Providing vancomycin (choice (C)) is not good
    antibiotic stewardship. Displaying posters has not been shown
    to be an enduring strategy; there may be an initial impact, but
    over time, the posters are not often noticed by clinicians.
18. (B) Salicylate toxicity will require dialysis in order to prevent
    acute renal failure, even if the renal lab values are normal upon
    admission. The remaining 3 choices are not anticipated
    interventions for a salicylate overdose.
19. (D) When the health care team expects that a patient’s death is
    imminent, the focus of care shifts to end-of-life care. Family
    support, avoiding the prolongation of death, and bereavement
    services become the focus. A palliative care consult (choice
    (A)) is done as early as possible in the event of an acute,
    severe illness. Hospice placement (choice (B)) is indicated as
    soon as the disease is determined to be terminal, not when
    death is imminent. Completing an advance directive (choice
    (C)) should ideally be done by all
    patients (with their primary care provider) prior to developing an
    acute illness.
20. (A) A component of the 3-hour bundle for sepsis is to
    remeasure the lactate 2–4 hours after the initial lactate if the
    initial lactate is > 2 mmol/L. If the second lactate is ≥ 4 mmol/L
    (or if the MAP remains ≤ 65 mmHg), the patient’s fluid status
    should be reassessed. A passive leg raise is a strategy that is
    used to evaluate whether or not the patient will respond to
    additional fluids. Vasopressin administration (choice (B)) is
    indicated when the MAP is not responsive, despite the infusion
    of higher doses of a vasopressor. Reevaluating the choice of
    antibiotic (choice (C)) is not generally indicated until cultures
    are available or until further testing indicates an infectious
    source that is different than what was initially suspected. An
    increase in FiO2 (choice (D)) is indicated as soon as hypoxemia
    is identified, but it is not determined by serum lactate.
21. (C) Manipulating the central line may increase the risk of
    contamination. Even if the central line is completely flushed,
    blood draws may result in increased colonization. The
    subclavian insertion site (choice (A)) is the preferred location for
    the insertion of a central line, whereas the femoral site is the
    least preferred site of insertion. During the insertion of a central
    line, full body draping with sterile towels, not just covering the
    patient’s chest with sterile towels (choice (B)), is
    preferred. Hand hygiene should be practiced with either gel or
    soap and water. The use of soap and water is required after
    working with a patient with C. difficile or a known infectious
    diarrhea (norovirus), after using the restroom, when hands are
    visibly dirty, and before eating. Other than these instances, gel
    may be used for hand hygiene, and soap and water do not
    need to be used.
6
